
--- Page 1 ---

(cid:32)(cid:33)(cid:36)(cid:31)(cid:37)(cid:3)(cid:33)(cid:24)(cid:3)
(cid:28)(cid:33)(cid:39)(cid:36)(cid:32)(cid:19)(cid:30)(cid:27)(cid:37)(cid:38)(cid:27)(cid:21)(cid:3)
(cid:21)(cid:33)(cid:32)(cid:22)(cid:39)(cid:21)(cid:38)
(cid:40)(cid:71)(cid:76)(cid:87)(cid:76)(cid:82)(cid:81)(cid:3)(cid:21)(cid:19)(cid:21)(cid:21)
(cid:32)(cid:33)(cid:36)(cid:31)(cid:37)(cid:3)(cid:33)(cid:24)(cid:3)(cid:28)(cid:33)(cid:39)(cid:36)(cid:32)(cid:19)(cid:30)(cid:27)(cid:37)(cid:38)(cid:27)(cid:21)(cid:3)(cid:21)(cid:33)(cid:32)(cid:22)(cid:39)(cid:21)(cid:38)
(cid:40)(cid:71)(cid:76)(cid:87)(cid:76)(cid:82)(cid:81)(cid:3)(cid:21)(cid:19)(cid:21)(cid:21)

--- Page 2 ---

NORMS OF
JOURNALISTIC
CONDUCT
Edition 2022
NORMS
OF
JOURNALISTIC
CONDUCT
Edition
2022

--- Page 3 ---

Press Council of India
NORMS OF JOURNALISTIC CONDUCT
Press Council of India
NORMS OF JOURNALISTIC CONDUCT
2020
2022

--- Page 4 ---

PRESS COUNCIL OF INDIA
Soochna Bhawan, 1st, 2nd & 3rd Floor, 8, CGO Complex Lodhi Road,
New Delhi-110003
Phone: 91 (011) 24366404-405
E-mail : secy-pci@nic.in, so.editorial-pci@gov.in
Website : www.presscouncil.nic.in
Printed at : Chandu Press, Delhi-110092

--- Page 5 ---

Contents
Part A: Principles and Ethics
S. No. Norm Page No.
1. Accuracy and Fairness 1
2. Advertisements 3
3. Astrological Prediction 9
4. Caste, Religion or Community References 9
5. Caution against Defamatory Writings 11
6. a) Caution in Criticising Judicial Acts 16
b) Reporting News Pertaining to Court Proceedings 17
7. Confidence to be Respected 18
8. Conjecture, Comment and Fact 19
9. Corrections 19
10. Covering Communal Disputes/Clashes 19
11. Criticism of Public Figures/Music Reviews 21
12. Editor’s Discretion 22
13. Foreign Relations 24
14. Fraudulent Activities 24
15. Gender Based Reporting 24
16. Glorification/Encouragement of Social Evils 24
to be Eschewed
17. Headlines 24
18. HIV/AIDS and the Media – DO’S 25
and DON’TS

--- Page 6 ---

19. Illegal Reproduction 28
20. Internal Disputes:
a) Management-Editor Relationship 28
b) Management vis-à-vis Journalist : 31
Functional Relationship
21. Investigative Journalism, its
Norms and Parameters 31
22. Letters to Editor 34
23. Newspapers May Expose Misuse of 35
Diplomatic Immunity
24. Newspapers to Avoid Crass Commercialism 35
25. Newspapers to Eschew Suggestive Guilt 36
26. Non-Return of Unsolicited Material 36
27. Norms for Photo Journalism 37
28. Obscenity and Vulgarity to be Eschewed 40
29. Paid News 42
30. Parameters of Right of Press to Comment 44
on the Acts and Conduct of Profession
31. Parameters of the Right of the Press to 44
Comment on the Acts and Conduct of
Public Officials
32. Paramount National Interest 45
33. Plagiarism 46
34. Pre-publication Verification 47
35. Privacy of Public Figures 49

--- Page 7 ---

36. Professional Misconduct 50
37. Professional Rivalry 51
38. Recording Interviews and Phone Conversation 51
39. Reporting on:
a) Information about the Mental Health Patient 51
b) Suicide 51
c) Natural Calamities 54
d) Child Abandonment 55
e) Sex Workers 55
40. Reporting on Proceedings of Legislature 56
41. Right of Reply 56
42. Right to Privacy 58
43. a) Trial by Media 59
b) Guidelines on Sting Operations 62
44. Unauthorised Lifting of News 62
45. Violence not to be Glorified 63
Part B: Guidelines on Specific Issues
a) Norms for Observance by the Press 64
in the Wake of Communal Disturbances, 1969
b) Coverage of Handouts of Militants/ 69
Terrorists-Guiding Principles-1991-1992
c) HIV/AIDS and the Media 71
d) Financial Journalism, 1996 84
e) Election Reporting, 1996 86

--- Page 8 ---

f) Guidelines on Undue Favours to Journalists 89
1988
g) Right to Privacy - Public Figures and
the Press, 1998 95
h) Model Guidelines for Publishing Overseas
Advertisements in Accordance with
Emigration Act, 1983 97
i) Guidelines for Protection of Child Rights 99
j) Model Accreditation/Advertisement
Rules - 2014 101
k) Model Advertisement Policy Guide - 2014 112
l) Advertisement on Ayurveda, Yoga and
Naturopathy, Unani, Siddha and Homeopathy 116
m) Principle Laid Down to Ascertain Paid News 117
n) Guidelines on Reporting on COVID-19 and
Safety Measures for Journalists 118
o) Guidelines for Medical Reporting 120
p) Provision of Section-23 of the Protection
of Children from Sexual Offences
(POCSO) A ct, 2012 121
Part C: Laws related to Press 123
Part D: Press Council’s Power, 128
Practices and Procedures
Part E : Good Practices in Journalism 133

--- Page 9 ---

Preface
The free press is not an option in democracy; it is the
sine qua non. It is the voice of the people and the special
purpose vehicle to supply information that helps people to
form a collective opinion.
Today, the press with its technological privileges
has assumed the foremost importance in society and
governance. With time the dynamics have undergone huge
transformations along with the maladies with which media
suffers. These days working as a media professional can be
challenging. Journalists are working under extreme pressure
to timely report facts of an incident and the competition to
be the first to report an occurrence often afflicts the integrity
of the press and media. Media credibility is essential to
promote public faith in the media; hence, the press needs to
dwell on the path of ethical journalism in their profession.
The Press Council of India, since its inception, has
been striving to preserve and promote the freedom of the
press while ensuring that the high standards of the Indian
press remain unfettered. In the process of realization of
its mandate, the Council from time to time develops the
code of ethics based on its adjudications, pronouncements
and advisories to guide the press and foster a sense of
responsibility and public service among all those engaged
in the profession of journalism. This updated and revised

--- Page 10 ---

edition of the Norms of Journalistic Conduct, 2022,
covers several sensitive topics/issues to guide the media
for reporting issues like sex workers, child abandonment,
suicide, etc. with the utmost sensitivity.
I believe the 2022 Edition of the Press Council’s
Norms of Journalistic Conduct would enlighten, encourage
and guide media persons and aspiring media workers to
value and practice ethical journalism.
Justice Ranjana Prakash Desai
Chairperson
Press Council of India

--- Page 11 ---

NORMS OF JOURNALIST CONDUCT
Part A: Principles and Ethics
The fundamental objective of journalism is to serve
the people with news, views, comments and information on
matters of public interest in a fair, accurate, unbiased, sober
and decent manner. To this end, the Press is expected to conduct
itself in keeping with certain norms of professionalism,
universally recognised. The norms enunciated below
and other specific guidelines appended thereafter, when
applied with due discernment and adaptation to the varying
circumstance of each case, will help the journalist to self-
regulate his or her conduct.
1. Accuracy and Fairness
i) The Press shall eschew publication of
inaccurate, baseless, graceless, misleading or
distorted material. All sides of the core issue or
subject should be reported. Unjustified rumours
and surmises should not be set forth as facts.
ii) It is incumbent for newspapers to play a
positive role in response to rumours affecting
the credibility of financial institutions having
public interface.
iii) While it is the duty of the press to expose the
wrong doings that come to their notice, such
reports need to be backed by irrefutable facts
and evidences.
iv) Newspaper should bear in mind that their duty
is to collect the news and place it in perspective
but not to create news.
1

--- Page 12 ---

v) Whenever any news is published on the basis
of an FIR and is critical of the reputation of any
person or body, the newspaper/journals must
clearly state in the same news report that the
report was only on the basis of the FIR and that
veracity of the version of the FIR has got to be
decided by the Court. The newspaper should
also publish the version of the affected party.
vi) The newspaper should not mis-construe or
misquote the statements given by leader. The
statements quoted in editorial should project the
true spirit of what is being tried to be conveyed
by them.
vii) Articles which analyse and interpret the history
on the basis of contemporaneous events cannot
be said to be unethical.
viii) When a newspaper is following a story on a
person and carries series of report on the issue
associated with him, it ought to publish the news
of his exoneration with same prominence as that
of series of previous reports.
ix) The newspaper is liable for damaging effects of
publishing alarming/sensational heading of
news story based on Study having no established
credentials.
x) Gossip reaches a localized few, a newspaper
report reaches lakhs and therefore a more
onerous responsibility devolves on the Press
towards the society.
xi) Media must overcome the tendency of
trivialization of information and build credibility
2

--- Page 13 ---

in the society so as to win the confidence of the
readers.
xii) Freedom of speech does not give right to
newspapers to write about an institution or
individual untrue facts even in a lighter note.
xiii) An error attributing historically incorrect
remarks of grave nature to an individual(s) shall
not be made.
xiv) The newspaper(s) should not indulge in act
aiding and facilitating gaming by publishing
Mataka, Gaming Charts and results thereof in
newspaper.
xv) A news which has international ramification
should not be published in casual manner.
xvi) Newspaper(s) while covering a news refer to
the Comptroller and Auditor General of India
or any other report shall ensure that the facts
and figures in news report should be accurate
and not imaginary.
2. Advertisements
i) Commercial advertisements are information as
much as social, economic or political information.
What is more, advertisements shape attitude and
ways of life at least as much as other kinds of
information and comment. Journalistic propriety
demands that advertisements must be clearly
distinguishable from news content carried in the
newspaper.
ii) No advertisement shall be published, which
promotes directly or indirectly production, sale
3

--- Page 14 ---

or consumption of cigarettes, tobacco products,
wine, alcohol, liquor and other intoxicants.
iii) Newspaper shall not publish advertisements,
which have a tendency to malign or hurt the
religious sentiments of any community or
section of society.
iv) Advertisements which offend the provisions of
the Drugs and Magical Remedies (Objectionable
Advertisement) Act as amended in 2002, or any
other statute should be rejected.
v) Newspapers should not publish an
advertisement containing anything which is
unlawful or illegal, or is contrary to public
decency, good taste or to journalistic ethics or
propriety.
vi) Journalistic propriety demands that
advertisements must be clearly distinguishable
from editorial matter carried in the newspaper.
Newspapers while publishing advertisements
should specify the amount received by them.
The rationale behind this is that advertisements
should be charged at rates usually chargeable
by a newspaper since payment of more than the
normal rates would amount to a subsidy to the
paper.
vii) Publication of dummy or lifted advertisements
that have neither been paid for, nor authorised by
the advertisers, constitute breach of journalistic
ethics especially when the paper raises a bill in
respect of such advertisements.
4

--- Page 15 ---

viii) Deliberate failure to publish an advertisement
in all the copies of a newspaper offends
against the standards of journalistic ethics and
constitutes gross professional misconduct.
ix) There should be total co-ordination and
communication between the advertisement
department and the editorial department of a
newspaper in the matter of considering the legality
propriety or otherwise of an advertisement
received for publication.
x) The editors should insist on their right to have
the final say in the acceptance or rejection of
advertisements, specially those which border
on or cross the line between decency and
obscenity.
xi) Newspapers to carry caution notice with
matrimonial advertisements carrying following
text* ‟Readers are advised to make appropriate
thorough inquiries before acting upon any
advertisement. This newspaper does not vouch
or subscribe to claim and representation made
by the advertiser regarding the particulars of
status, age, income of the bride/bridegroom”.
xii) An editor shall be responsible for all matters,
including advertisements published in the
newspaper. If responsibility is disclaimed, this
shall be explicitly stated beforehand.
* The Hon’ble High Court of Delhi in connection with FAO No 65/ 1998 of
Smt. Harjeet Kaur Vs. Shri Surinder Pal Singh directed the Press Council of
India to instruct the newspaper to publish classified/matrimonial advertisement
by advising them to alongside publish the said Caution Notice in their
newspapers.
5

--- Page 16 ---

xiii) Tele-friendship advertisements carried by
newspapers across the country inviting general
public to dial the given number for ‘entertaining’
talk and offering suggestive tele-talk tend to
pollute adolescent minds and promote immoral
cultural ethos. The Press should refuse to accept
such advertisements.
xiv) Classified advertisements of health and physical
fitness services using undignified languages,
indicative of covert soliciting, are violative
of law as well as ethics. The newspaper
should adopt a mechanism for vetting such
an advertisement to ensure that the soliciting
advertisements are not carried.
xv) Advertisements of contraceptive and supply
of brand item attaching to the advertisement
is not very ethical, given the social milieu and
the traditional values held dear in our country.
A newspaper has a sacred duty to educate
people about precautionary measures to avoid
AIDS and exhibit greater far sight in accepting
advertisement even though issued by social
welfare organisation.
xvi) Employment News which is trusted as a
purveyor of authentic news on government
jobs should be more careful in accepting
advertisements of only bonafide private
bodies.
xvii) While accepting advertisements of educational
institutes newspapers may ensure that such
advertisements carry the mandatory statement
6

--- Page 17 ---

that the concerned institutes are recognized
under the relevant enactments of law.
xviii) Advertisements play extremely vital role in
shaping the values and concerns of the present
day society and as more and more lenient view
is taken of what is not the norm, the speedier
may be acceptability of such matters in ‘public
perception’ but at what cost is the essential
point for consideration. It should be borne in
mind that in the race to be globally relevant we
do not leave behind the values that have earned
India the unique place it enjoys globally on
moral and ethical plane.
xix) Publication of an advertisement for adoption
of an unborn child is not only illegal but also
unethical. The paper should duly scrutinize
advertisements before publishing them.
xx) The newspaper cannot be held responsible for
publication of an advertisement given by the
advertisement agency related to legal dispute
on behalf of its client.
xxi) All material published as an advertisement or
promotional feature clearly so identified for the
benefit of the public at large.
xxii) The newspapers and periodicals should
scrutinize the advertisement inputs from
ethical as well as legal angles in view of the
editor’s responsibility for all contents including
advertisement, under Section 7 of PRB Act,
1867. Revenue generation alone cannot
and should not be the sole aim of the Press,
juxtaposed much larger public responsibility.
7

--- Page 18 ---

xxiii) Publication seeking Kidney from willing
altruistic donor is not to be made.*
xxiv) Journalists/Editors shall disclose the identity
of advertiser or the person at whose instance
advertisement is published.
xxv) Newspaper shall not publish any advertisement
intending to pass on as news using names and
photographs of Hon’ble President and Prime
Minister of India.
xxvi) Newspaper(s) while publishing Advertise-
ment/Advertorials similar to news, shall
be printed with a Heading “Advertisement/
Advertorials” in bold letters with the font size
equal to sub headings appearing in the page.
xxvii) Publishing advertisement of jobs, only with
phone numbers and without any further details
such as the nature of work to be done by the
prospective candidate in case of selection
and identity of the employer is unethical and
be not published as it may facilitate “human
trafficking” as lots of unsuspected boys and
girls shall become victim.
Newspapers intending to publish such
advertisements should publish the nature of
work to be done, so as to avoid promoting
unethical practices.
“Disclaimer” published shall not absolve the
newspaper from its responsibility.
* High Court of Kerala order dated 24.11.2017 in W.P. No. 33801/2017
8

--- Page 19 ---

3. Astrological Prediction
The promotion of astrological prediction and
superstitious practices is likely to produce an unsettling
effect on the minds of the readers, and is thus undesirable.
The editors of general interest dailies and periodicals who
believe in promoting a scientific temper and in combating
superstition and fatalism, should avoid publication of
astrological predictions. Readers who are interested in the
subject of astrology can turn to specialized publications on
the subject.
4. Caste, Religion or Community References
i) In general, the caste identification of a person or
a particular class should be avoided, particularly
when in the context it conveys a sense or
attributes a conduct or practice derogatory to
that caste.
ii) Newspapers are advised against the use of word
‘Harijan’ which has been objected to by some,
and shall use the word Schedule Caste as per
Article 341.*
iii) An accused or a victim shall not be described
by his caste or community when the same
does not have anything to do with the offence
or the crime and plays no part either in the
identification of any accused or proceeding, if
there be any.
iv) Newspaper should not publish any fictional
literature distorting and portraying the religious
or well known characters in an adverse light
offending the susceptibilities of large sections
* Modified keeping in view of provision of Constitution of India, 1950
9

--- Page 20 ---

of society who hold those characters in high
esteem, invested with attributes of the virtuous
and lofty.
(v) Commercial exploitation of the name of
prophets, seers or deities is repugnant to
journalistic ethics and good taste.
vi) It is the duty of the newspaper to ensure that
the tone, spirit and language of a write up is
not objectionable, provocative, against the
unity and integrity of the country, spirit of
the constitution, seditious and inflammatory
in nature or designed to promote communal
disharmony. It should also not attempt to
promote balkanisation of the country.
vii) One of the jobs of the journalists is also to bring
forth to the public notice the plight of the weaker
sections of society. They are the watchdogs on
behalf of the society of its weaker sections.
viii) While the changing norms of society have to be
kept in mind, newspaper should also take due
care in avoiding publication which may hurt
sentiments of general public particularly on the
occasion of days holding special significance.
ix) To maintain communal harmony and bind the
social fabric of the country, press ought to be
more careful while publishing names of any
organization and alleging their involvement in
terrorist activities.
x) Plea of technical error to defend provocative
and out of context statement are inadmissible
and constitute irresponsible journalism.
10

--- Page 21 ---

xi) Caricature of a deity to depict a political
scenario at relevant time cannot be said to be
objectionable.
xii) A news item published on the basis of book
may not be in tune with general belief of the
members of religious organization but on this
ground alone the news item cannot be termed
as illegal and unethical.
xiii) The domain of ethics is much larger than law and
ethicality of an action needs to be judged from
a common man’s point of view. The newspaper,
therefore, may not publish matter that could
portray the religious characters in an adverse light
or offend the religions susceptibilities of large
section of society who hold those characters,
invested with attributes of the virtuous and lofty
in high esteem.
xiv) The press is expected to use its power to promote
and contribute in maintaining communal
harmony.
xv) The fabric of a community is very delicate. The
newspapers and periodicals should be sensitive
in use of words with different connotation at
different places and in different languages.
xvi) The word/expression “Dalit” shall not be used
to provoke or demean a community.
5. Caution Against Defamatory Writings
i) Newspaper should not publish anything which
is manifestly defamatory or libellous against
11

--- Page 22 ---

any individual/organisation unless after due
care and verification, there is sufficient reason/
evidence to believe that it is true and its
publication will be for public good.
ii) Truth is no defence for publishing derogatory,
scurrilous and defamatory material against
a private citizen where no public interest is
involved.
iii) No personal remarks which may be considered
or construed to be derogatory in nature against
a dead person should be published except in
rare cases of public interest, as the dead person
cannot possibly contradict or deny those
remarks.
iv) The Press has a duty, discretion and right to
serve the public interest by drawing reader’s
attention to citizens of doubtful antecedents
and of questionable character but as responsible
journalists they should observe due restraint
and caution in hazarding their own opinion or
conclusion in branding these persons as ‘cheats’
or ‘killers’ etc. The cardinal principle being
that the guilt of a person should be established
by proof of facts alleged and not by proof of
the bad character of the accused. In the zest to
expose, the Press should not exceed the limits
of ethical caution and fair comment.
v) The Press shall not rely on objectionable past
behaviour of a citizen to provide the background
for adverse comments with reference to fresh
action of that person. If public good requires
such reference, the Press should make pre-
12

--- Page 23 ---

publication inquiries from the authorities
concerned about the follow up action, if any, in
regard to earlier adverse actions.
vi) Where the impugned publication is manifestly
injurious to the reputation of the complainant,
the onus shall be on the respondent to show
that it was true or to establish that it constituted
fair comment made in good faith and for public
good.
(vii) Newspapers cannot claim privilege or licence
to malign a person or body claiming special
protection or immunity on the plea of having
published the item as a satire under special
columns such as ‘gossip’, ‘parody’ etc.
(viii) Publication of defamatory news by one paper
does not give licence to others to publish news/
information reproducing or repeating the same.
The fact of publication of similar report by
another publication does not bestow the status
of accuracy on the charges.
(ix) It is necessary that the press realise its
responsibility to the society due to the unique
position enjoyed by it in being able to interact
directly with the citizenry and utilize its
advantageous position for the betterment of
the society and the advancement of the country
rather than indulging in giving credence to
rumours and sensationalism. It is also necessary
that the press, particularly the small local press,
learn to appreciate the clear distinction between
matters of ‘public interest’ and ‘those in public
13

--- Page 24 ---

interest’. While gossips and social dealings
may be found to be of interest by the public
but they serve no public purpose or interest and
the press should scrupulously avoid wasting its
precious space on such matters.
(x) Insertion of out-of-context, uncalled for and
irrelevant statements likely to malign a person
or an organisation must be eschewed.
(xi) Even while a newspaper has the liberty or even
duty to report political developments, that
reporting may not be with angularity. Freedom
of Press does not give licence to a newspaper
to malign a political leader or mar his future
political prospects by publishing fake and
defamatory writings.
(xii) It must be remembered by the Press that the
freedom of speech and expression enshrined
in the democratic set up and enjoyed by the
fourth estate also casts on it a responsibility.
The newspapers are not expected to use it as a
tool by itself creating evidence and later using
the evidence to make false propaganda in its
own journal.
(xiii) The Press deserves accolades for bringing to
light the inducements offered to influence their
reporting and such exposure will not amount to
defamation.
(xiv) Locus Standi In cases involving personal
allegations/criticism, only the concerned
person enjoying the locus standi can move
the plaint or claim right to reply. However, a
14

--- Page 25 ---

representative organisation of persons attached
to an organisation or a sect/group has the locus
standi to move complaints against a publication
directly criticising the conduct of a leader.
(xv) Public Interest and Public Bodies As a
custodian of public interest, the Press has
a right to highlight cases of corruption and
irregularities in public bodies but such material
should be based on irrefutable evidence and
published after due inquiries and verification
from the concerned source and after obtaining
the version of the person/authority being
commented upon. Newspapers should refrain
from barbed, stinging and pungent language
and ironical/satirical style of comment. The
attempt of the press should be to so shake up
the institutions as to improve their working,
not to destroy them or the public confidence
in their working or demoralize the workforce.
A corresponding duty of course devolves on
them to ensure that in doing so they present
a fair and balanced report, uninfluenced by
any extraneous consideration. The Press as
a custodian of public interest and a protector
of its rights is also expected to bring correct
information to its notice so that it is able to
correctly judge those to whom it has entrusted
the responsibility of running the country.
(xvi) The media and the authorities are two very
important pillars of our democracy and for the
government to function successfully in public
15

--- Page 26 ---

interest a press as responsible as watchful is an
essential pre-requisite.
(xvii) Reference to incident which took place long
time ago in a news has no relevance at long
distance of time. It clearly intends to defame
someone.
6. a) Caution in Criticising Judicial Acts
i) Excepting where the court sits ‘in-camera’ or
directs otherwise, it is open to a newspaper to
report pending judicial proceedings, in a fair,
accurate and reasonable manner. But it shall
not publish anything:
 which, in its direct and immediate effect,
creates a substantial risk of obstructing,
impeding or prejudicing seriously the due
administration of justice; or
 is in the nature of a running commentary
or debate, or records the paper’s own
findings conjectures, reflection or
comments on issues, sub-judice and
which may amount to abrogation to the
newspaper the functions of the court; or
 regarding the personal character of the
accused standing trial on a charge of
committing a crime.
ii) Newspaper shall not as a matter of caution,
publish or comment on evidence collected as a
result of investigative journalism, when, after
the accused is arrested and charged, the court
becomes seized of the case: Nor should they
16

--- Page 27 ---

reveal, comment upon or evaluate a confession
allegedly made by the accused.
iii) While newspapers may, in the public interest,
make reasonable criticism of a judicial act or
the judgement of a court for public good; they
shall not cast scurrilous aspersions on, or impute
improper motives, or personal bias to the judge.
Nor shall they scandalise the court or the judiciary
as a whole, or make personal allegations of lack
of ability or integrity against a judge.
iv) Newspaper shall, as a matter of caution, avoid
unfair and unwarranted criticism which, by
innuendo, attributes to a judge extraneous
consideration for performing an act in due
course of his/her judicial functions, even if such
criticism does not strictly amount to criminal
Contempt of Court.
6.b) Reporting News Pertaining to Court Proceedings
i) Before publishing a news item about court
proceedings, it will be appropriate for the
correspondent and editor to ascertain its
genuineness, correctness and authenticity from
the records so that the concerned person can
be held guilty and accountable for furnishing
incorrect facts or wrong information about the
court proceedings.
ii) When proceedings of the Courts are held
in public view in which the reporters of the
newspaper are also present, it is not necessary
for the newspaper to obtain the certified copy
of Order before publication of the news.
17

--- Page 28 ---

iii) Observations of a Court during hearing are
often an attempt to solicit information, and not
a part of records/orders. Thus, there is need for
a reporter to understand the difference to report
correctly.
iv) The media should not carry names of legal
practitioners or name of the judges concerned,
who dealt with particular cases.
v) In the matter of interpretation of a court’s
judgments, a newspaper is expected to act
reasonably and not quote selectively. They are
also expected to clearly identify the selection
so made.
7. Confidence to be Respected
If information is received from a confidential source,
the confidence should be respected. The journalist cannot
be compelled by the Press Council to disclose such source;
but it shall not be regarded as a breach of journalistic ethics
if the source is voluntarily disclosed in proceedings before
the Council by the journalist who considers it necessary
to repel effectively a charge against him/her. This rule
requiring a newspaper not to publish matters disclosed to it
in confidence, is not applicable where:
i) consent of the source is subsequently obtained;
or
ii) the editor clarifies by way of an appropriate
footnote that since the publication of certain
matters were in the public interest, the
information in question was being published
although it had been made ‘off the record’.
18

--- Page 29 ---

8. Conjecture, Comment and Fact
i) Newspaper should not pass on or elevate
conjecture, speculation or comment as a
statement of fact. All these categories should
be distinctly identified.
ii) Cartoons and caricatures depicting good
humour are to be placed in a special category
of news that enjoy more liberal attitude.
iii) Though satire is an accepted form of literary
writing, defamatory statement should not be
carried in disguise.
iv) Expression such as ‘incompetent’ or ‘impotent’
need to be read in the context of a political
commentary, to determine the offensiveness.
9. Corrections
i) When any factual error or mistake is detected
or confirmed, the newspaper should suo-motu
publish the correction promptly with due
prominence and with apology or expression of
regrets in a case of serious lapse.
ii) The correction and apology or expression of
regrets shall be published in the same edition
of newspapers with due prominence.
10. Covering Communal Disputes/Clashes
i) News, views or comments relating to communal
or religious disputes/clashes shall be published
after proper verification of facts and presented
with due caution and restraint in a manner which
is conducive to the creation of an atmosphere
19

--- Page 30 ---

congenial to communal harmony, amity and
peace. Sensational, provocative and alarming
headlines are to be avoided. Acts of communal
violence or vandalism shall be reported in a
manner as may not undermine the people’s
confidence in the law and order machinery of
the State. Giving community-wise figures of
the victims of communal riot, or writing about
the incident in a style which is likely to inflame
passions, aggravate the tension, or accentuate
the strained relations between the communities/
religious groups concerned, or which has a
potential to exacerbate the trouble, shall be
avoided.
ii) Journalists and columnists owe a very special
responsibility to their country in promoting
communal peace and amity. Their writings are
not a mere reflection of their own feelings but
help to large extent in moulding the feelings
and sentiments of the society at large. It is
therefore, of utmost importance that they use
their pen with circumspection and restrain.
iii) The role of media in such situations (Gujarat
Carnage/Crisis) is to be peacemakers and
not abettors, to be troubleshooters and not
troublemakers. Let the media play their noble
role of promoting peace and harmony among
the people in the present crisis in Gujarat. Any
trend to disrupt the same either directly or
indirectly would be an anti-national act. There
is a greater moral responsibility on the media to
do their best to build up the national solidarity
20

--- Page 31 ---

and to re-cement the communal harmony at
all levels remembering the noble role they had
played during the pre-independence days.
iv) The media, as a chronicle of tomorrow’s history,
owes an undeniable duty to the future to record
events as simple untailored facts. The analysis
of the events and opinion thereon are a different
genre altogether. The treatment of the two also
thus has necessarily to be different. In times
of crisis, facts unadorned and simply put, with
due care and restraint, cannot be reasonably
objected to in a democracy. However, a heavy
responsibility devolves on the author of opinion
articles. The author has to ensure that not only
are his or her analysis free from any personal
preferences, prejudices or notions, but also they
are based on verified, accurate and established
facts and do not tend to foment disharmony
or enmity between castes, communities and
races.
v) While the role and responsibility of the
media in breaking down communal fences
and promoting harmony and national interest
should not be undermined, it is also essential
to allow the citizens their freedom of speech.
The Press of India has necessarily to judge and
balance the two.
11. Criticism of Public Figures/Music Reviews
i) An actor or singer who appears on a public stage
submits his performance to the judgement of
public and as such the critics’ comments having
21

--- Page 32 ---

proximate nexus with the merits of artists
performance cannot be held to be defamatory.
However, the critics should refrain from
writing anything, which could, be construed as
remotely casting cloud on the artist’s personal
credibility.
ii) An author cannot question the critical review
of a book, unless it is actuated by malafide
simply because some of the editors and scholars
have commended the book, would not mean
that other critiques have no right to express a
contrary view.
iii) A critique constitutes the view of author and
large reproduction from the book directly
relevant to the critique cannot be held as
voilative of the copyright.
12. Editors’ Discretion
i) In the matter of writing an editorial, the editor
enjoys a good deal of latitude and discretion.
It is for him to choose the subject and it is also
for him to use such language as he considers
appropriate, provided that in writing the
editorial he doesn’t transgress the law and
violate the norms of journalism and editorial
comments, views published in the newspaper
are couched in sober, dignified and socially
acceptable language.
ii) Selection of the material for publication as
reports/articles/letters lies within the discretion
of an editor. It is his duty to see that on a
controversial issue of public interest all views
are given equal prominence so that the people
22

--- Page 33 ---

can form their independent opinion in the
matter.
iii) The editor should not publish the news report/
article if his mind is in doubt about the truth of
the news report/article. If the veracity of any
part of the news report/article is in doubt, that
portion should be omitted and rest be published
provided the editor is satisfied that the remainder
is substantially true and its publication will be
for public benefit.
iv) It is a prerogative of editor to decide prominence
of news it deserves in newspaper.
v) Bearing in the mind the clear distinction between
a ‘news report’ and ‘an opinion article’, the Editor
has a liberty to edit an article but this liberty
cannot be extended so as to delete the vital part
or core contents of the article without seeking
permission of the author, which may distort the
intent, purpose and meaning behind the article.
vi) Headline’s should be carefully drawn adjudged
against their instant impact on the readers.
vii) Editor is responsible for all facts printed in
newspaper(s).
viii) The editors must bear in mind their duty towards
society while publishing job/employment
advertisement with insufficient details as it may
facilitate Human Trafficking and be done only
after proper inquiry.
ix) Editorials are expression of views of editors
which is guaranteed under the Constitution of
India and its sanctity does not depend upon any
individual agreeing to the same or not.
23

--- Page 34 ---

13. Foreign Relations
Media plays a very important role in moulding public
opinion and developing better understanding between
countries. Objective reporting so as not to jeopardise
friendly bilateral relations is therefore desirable.
14. Fraudulent Activities
Defrauding the public by closing down a publication
subsequent to collection of subscription is unethical on the
part of management of the paper/periodical/magazine. If the
closure is inevitable, the subscription amount due should be
returned to the subscribers.
15. Gender Based Reporting
Press should play a vital role in removing the age-old
gender biases and even unilateral description as the news
item could contribute to continuation of such bias to retard
social balances and development.
16. Glorification/Encouragement of Social Evils to be
Eschewed
Newspapers shall not allow their columns to be
misused for writings which have a tendency to encourage
or glorify social evils like Sati Pratha or Ostentatious
Celebrations.
17. Headlines:
i) In general and particularly in the context of
communal disputes or clashes:
a. Provocative and sensational headlines are
to be avoided;
b. Headings must reflect and justify the
matter printed under them;
24

--- Page 35 ---

c. Headings containing allegations made in
statements should either identify the body
or the source making it or at least carry
quotation marks.
ii) Headlines of an article/news story or news item
attributes certain act on part of a person. While
choosing the headline the paper should take
care that they reflect the text of the report.
18. HIV/AIDS and the Media–DO’S and DON’TS
DO’S
i) Media must inform and educate the people, not
alarm or scare them.
ii) Be objective, factual and sensitive.
iii) Keep abreast with changing realities of fast-
evolving infection.
iv) Use appropriate language and terminology that
is non-stigmatising.
v) Ensure headlines are accurate and balanced.
vi) Be responsible; give all sides of the picture,
using voices of people living with HIV and AIDS
(PLHIVs).
vii) Dispel misconceptions about prevention and
transmission.
viii) Debunk myths about miracle cures and
unscientific claims of protection from infection.
ix) Highlight positive stories without underplaying
seriousness of the issue.
25

--- Page 36 ---

x) Uphold confidentiality of infected people, their
families and associates.
xi) Ensure photographs do not breach their
confidentiality.
xii) Ensure photo captions are accurate.
xiii) Ensure gender sensitive reporting and avoid
stereotyping.
xiv) Obtain data from authorised sources as inaccurate
reports have adverse impact on morale and
increase stigma.
xv) Journalists are responsible for ensuring
interviewees understand repercussions of
revelations/identification.
xvi) Ensure informed consent, in written form
wherever possible.
xvii) Balance coverage of a negative story like
HIV-related suicide or incidence of discrimination
by including contacts of helplines/counselling
centres.
xviii) Broaden reportage to examine impact of infection
on economic, business, political and development
issues.
xix) When in doubt contact the local network of
positive people or state AIDS control society or
existing terminology guidelines for clarification.
xx) Ensure questions are not deeply personal or
accusatory.
xxi) Show PLHIVs in a positive light by portraying
them as individuals instead of ‘victims’.
26

--- Page 37 ---

DON’TS
i) Don’t sensationalise the story.
ii) Don’t make value judgements that seek to blame
PLHIVs.
iii) Don’t use terms like ‘scourge’ to describe the
infection or describe PLHIVs as AIDS carrier,
prostitute, drug addict, AIDS patient/victim/
sufferer.
iv) Don’t focus needlessly on how a PLHIV was
infected.
v) Don’t identify children infected and affected by
HIV and AIDS by name or through a photograph
even with consent.
vi) Don’t use hidden cameras.
vii) Avoid alarmist reports and images of the sick and
dying that convey a sense of gloom, helplessness
and isolation.
viii) Don’t use skull, crossbones, snakes or such
visuals as graphics.
ix) Avoid references to caste, gender or sexual
orientation.
x) Don’t reinforce stereotypes about sexual
minorities including those who are Lesbian, Gay,
Bisexual or Transgender (LGBT).
xi) Don’t portray infected persons as victims, culprits
or objects of pity.
xii) Don’t promote misleading advertisements
related to HIV, STIs, skin diseases, tuberculosis
and other opportunistic infections .
27

--- Page 38 ---

xiii) Don’t breach the confidentiality of those opting
for voluntary testing.
19. Illegal Reproduction
i) The Press shall not reproduce in any form
offending portions or excerpts from a proscribed
book.
ii) The newspaper should give due credit to the
Photographer whose photo work has been
published by the newspaper.
20. Internal Disputes
(a) Management-Editor Relationship
i) There is a well-recognised distinction between
the editor and the journalists on the one hand and
the Manager, the Executive or the Administrator
on the other, whatever the nomenclature that
they may carry in a particular newspaper
establishment. The duties and responsibilities
of the editor and the management differ and
whatever the co-ordination may be required to
efficiently manage the establishment to bring
out the journal, the functions of the two are
separate and have to kept as such.
Once the owner lays down the policy of the
newspaper for general guidance, neither he nor
anybody on his behalf can interfere with the
day to day functioning of the editor and the
journalistic staff working under him.
It is well established that the freedom of the
press is essentially the freedom of the people
28

--- Page 39 ---

to be informed accurately and adequately on all
issues, problems, events and developments. In
discharge of the editorial functions the editor is
supreme and superior even to the owner.
The independence of the newspaper is essentially
the independence of the editor from all internal
and external restrictions. Unless the editor enjoys
this freedom he will be unable to discharge his
primary duty which is to the people and without
such freedom, he can be held responsible in law
for all that appears in the newspaper.
In the running of the newspaper, the managerial,
administrative or business side of the newspaper
has to be kept independent of its editorial side and
should not be allowed to encroach upon or interfere
with the editorial section. This precaution is to be
taken even when the owner and the editor is the
same. The proprietor must not allow his business
interests and considerations to either dominate or
interfere with the newspapers obligation to the
people.
That is why there is also an obligation on the
management to select a person as the editor who
is competent and bears integrity of character and
independence of mind.
The successful working of any arrangement in
the ultimate analysis would depend on mutual
understanding, cooperation and goodwill
between the management, the editor, editorial
journalist staff and all those who are faithfully
working in the production of a paper.
29

--- Page 40 ---

If the co-ordination between the different
departments including the editorial is effected
by the Brand Management without in any way
interfering with the freedom of the editor to
include or exclude news or views, the length
or details as well as their language and the
place where they are to be published, and the
prominence with which they should appear,
there may not be much grievance that such co-
ordination is in violation of the freedom of the
editor. However, if the choice of the editor with
regard to selection of material in any manner is
sought to be interfered with, it is undoubtedly an
unwarranted encroachment on the said freedom.
(ii) The editor under no circumstances can be asked
by the proprietor to serve his private interests.
To require an editor to cater to the personal
interests of the proprietor is not only to demean
the office of the editor but also to encroach
upon his status as a trustee of the society in
respect of the contents of the newspaper. In any
country which swears by the freedom and the
independence of the press, an attempt by any
proprietor of a newspaper to use his editor as his
personal agent to promote his private interests
and to compel him to act and to write, to serve
them is both offensive and reprehensive. Any
editor or for that matter any journalist who
accepts or condescends to do such jobs not
only degrades himself but also the profession
of journalism and does not deserve the calling.
He betrays the trust the society keeps in him for
30

--- Page 41 ---

furnishing fair, objective and comprehensive
news and views.
(b) Management vis-à-vis Journalist: Functional
Relationship
Direction of the newspaper management to the
reporter to perform administrative/commercial
side of the duty other than his journalistic duty
is an unethical practice and impinges on the
independence of journalists, destroying the
functional relationship.
21. Investigative Journalism, its Norms and Parameters
Investigative reporting has three basic elements:
i) It has to be the work of the reporter, not of
others he is reporting;
ii) The subject should be of public importance for
the reader to know;
iii) An attempt is being made to hide the truth from
the people.
The first norm follows as a necessary corollary
from:
(a) That the investigative reporter should, as a
rule, base his story on facts investigated,
detected and verified by himself and not on
hearsay or on derivative evidence collected
by a third party, not checked up from direct,
authentic sources by the reporter himself.
(b) There being a conflict between the factors
which require openness and those which
necessitate secrecy, the investigative
31

--- Page 42 ---

journalist should strike and maintain in his
report a proper balance between openness
on the one hand and secrecy on the other,
placing the public good above everything.
(c) The investigative journalist should resist
the temptation of quickies or quick gains
conjured up from half-baked incomplete,
doubtful facts, not fully checked up and
verified from authentic sources by the
reporter himself.
(d) Imaginary facts, or ferreting out or
conjecturing the non-existent should be
scrupulously avoided. Facts, facts and
yet more facts are vital and they should
be checked and cross-checked whenever
possible until the moment the paper goes
to Press.
(e) The newspaper must adopt strict standards
of fairness and accuracy of facts. Findings
should be presented in an objective
manner, without exaggerating or distorting,
that would stand up in a court of law, if
necessary.
(f) The reporter must not approach the matter
or the issue under investigation, in a manner
as though he were the prosecutor or counsel
for the prosecution. The reporter’s approach
should be fair, accurate and balanced. All
facts properly checked up, both for and
against the core issues, should be distinctly
and separately stated, free from any one-
sided inferences or unfair comments. The
32

--- Page 43 ---

tone and tenor of the report and its language
should be sober, decent and dignified, and
not needlessly offensive, barbed, derisive or
castigatory, particularly while commenting
on the version of the person whose alleged
activity or misconduct is being investigated.
Nor should the investigative reporter
conduct the proceedings and pronounce
his verdict of guilt or innocence against
the person whose alleged criminal acts and
conduct were investigated, in a manner as if
he were a court trying the accused.
(g) In all proceedings including the investiga-
tion, presentation and publication of the
report, the investigative journalist news-
paper should be guided by the paramount
principle of criminal jurisprudence, that
a person is innocent unless the offence
alleged against him is proved beyond
doubt by independent, reliable evidence.
(h) The private life, even of a public figure,
is his own. Exposition or invasion of his
personal privacy or private life is not
permissible unless there is clear evidence
that the wrongdoings in question have a
reasonable nexus with the misuse of his
public position or power and has an adverse
impact on public interest.
(i) Though the legal provisions of Criminal
Procedure do not in terms, apply to
investigating proceedings by a journalist,
33

--- Page 44 ---

the fundamental principles underlying
them can be adopted as a guide on grounds
of equity, ethics and good conscience.
(j) To say that the press should not publish
any information, till it is officially
released would militate against the spirit
of investigative journalism and even to an
extent the purpose of journalism.
k) When any news item affecting somebody’s
character is proposed to be published in the
newspaper on the basis of any CD or other
such device then first the authenticity of
such evidence should first be ascertained
through a forensic expert.
22. Letters to Editor
i) An editor who decides to open his columns for
letters on a controversial subject, is not obliged
to publish all the letters received in regard to
that subject. He is entitled to select and publish
only some of them either in entirety or the gist
thereof. However, in exercising this discretion,
he must make an honest endeavour to ensure
that what is published is not one-sided but
represents a fair balance between the views for
and against with respect to the principal issue
in controversy.
ii) In the event of rejoinder upon rejoinder being
sent by two parties on a controversial subject,
the editor has the discretion to decide at which
stage to close the continuing column.
34

--- Page 45 ---

iii) Editor may have a right to edit a ‘letter to
editor’ but such editing should not deviate
from the intended view.
23. Newspapers May Expose Misuse of Diplomatic
Immunity
The media shall make every possible effort to build
bridges of co-operation, friendly relations and better
understanding between India and Foreign States. At the same
time, it is the duty of a newspaper to expose any misuse or
undue advantage of the diplomatic immunities.
24. Newspapers to Avoid Crass Commercialism
i) While newspapers are entitled to ensure,
improve or strengthen their financial viability
by all legitimate means, the Press shall not
engage in crass commercialism or unseemly
cut-throat commercial competition with their
rivals in a manner repugnant to high professional
standards and good taste.
ii) Predatory price wars/trade competition among
newspapers, laced with tones disparaging the
products of each other, initiated and carried
on in print, assume the colour of unfair ‘trade’
practice, repugnant to journalistic ethics. The
question as when it assumes such an unethical
character is one of the fact depending on the
circumstances of each case.
iii) The practice of taking security deposit by an
editor from the journalists at the time of their
appointment is unethical.
35

--- Page 46 ---

(iv) The media house must retain its impartiality
in functioning as media house and reporting
cannot be permitted to become subservient to
other business interests which the owner of
the media house may have. When such private
interest conflict with public duty of such vast
magnitude, segregation of the two is not only
justified but essential.
25. Newspapers to Eschew Suggestive Guilt
i) Newspapers should eschew suggestive guilt by
association. They should not name or identify
the family or relatives or associates of a person
convicted or accused of a crime, when they are
totally innocent and a reference to them is not
relevant to the matter being reported.
ii) It is contrary to the norms of journalism for
a paper to identify itself with and project or
promote the case of any one party in the case
of any controversy/dispute.
26. Non-return of Unsolicited Material
i) A paper is not bound to return unsolicited
material sent for consideration of publication.
However, when the same is accompanied by
stamped envelope, the paper should make all
efforts to return it.
ii) Whenever articles from the contributors are
published free of remuneration, there must be
an agreement not to pay and the newspaper
should follow this practice as a rule.
36

--- Page 47 ---

27. Norms for Photo Journalism
i) Since a picture or visual presentation of news
creates a stronger and more lasting impression
on the readers and viewers than mere words,
photojournalists and other visual news
producers have to be a lot more responsible
and careful in the discharge of their duties.
They must, therefore, ensure that in keeping
with the high standards of journalism, their
presentations are always in public interest, fair,
accurate, unbiased, sober and decent.
DO’S’
1. Images should be accurate and
comprehensive and the subjects be
presented in proper context.
2. All subjects should be treated with respect
and dignity. Special consideration be given
to vulnerable subjects and victims of crime
or tragedy be treated compassionately.
Private grief be intruded only when the
public has an overriding and justifiable
interest in sharing or viewing it.
3. While editing a visual, the maintenance of
the integrity of the content and context of
the photographic images should be ensured.
Images should not be manipulated neither
should there be addition or alteration in
sound in any way that can mislead viewers
or misrepresent subjects.
4. Strive to be unobtrusive and humble in
dealing with subjects.
37

--- Page 48 ---

5. The integrity of the photographic moment
should be respected.
6. Pictures should not reflect anything that is
obscene, vulgar or offensive to good public
taste.
7. Strive to ensure that the public’s business
is conducted in public. Defend the rights of
access for all journalists.
8. Strive for total and unrestricted access to
subjects and recommend alternatives to
shallow or rushed opportunities.
9. Seek a diversity of viewpoints and work
to show unpopular or unnoticed points of
view.
10. Strive by example and influence to maintain
the spirit and high standards expressed in
this code. When confronted with situations
in which proper action is not clear, seek the
counsel of those who exhibit the highest
standards of the profession.
DON’TS
1. While photographing subjects do not
intentionally contribute to, alter, or seek to
alter or influence events.
2. The privacy of an individual should not be
intruded or invaded unless it is outweighed
by genuine overriding public interest, not
by a prurient or morbid curiosity.
38

--- Page 49 ---

3. While covering terrorist attacks, communal
riots or other acts of violence, do not show
mangled corpses or such other images as
cause revulsion or terror or rouse communal
or sectarian passions.
4. Do not get manipulated by staged photo
opportunities.
5. Do not accept gifts, favours or compensation
from those who might seek to influence the
coverage.
6. Avoid political, civic or business
involvements or employment that could
compromise or appear to compromise their
professional independence.
7. No payment or material reward should
be made to the sources or subject for
information or participation.
8. The work should not reflect any kind of
biases.
9. Do not intentionally sabotage the efforts of
other journalists.
ii) Highlighting gambling menace being ignored
by the Police through a photograph of police
official standing near a covert gambling den only
for symbolic purpose, cannot be considered as
unethical or violation of journalistic norms.
iii) ‘Dignity in death’ is a principle widely observed
in civil society and unless the photographic
depiction of such event directly impacts the
39

--- Page 50 ---

public interest or purpose, the media would be
well advised to avoid it.
28. Obscenity and Vulgarity to be Eschewed
i) Newspapers/journalists shall not publish
anything which is obscene, vulgar or offensive
to public good taste.
ii) Newspapers shall not display advertisements
which are vulgar or which, through depiction
of a woman in nude or lewd posture, provoke
lecherous attention of males as if she herself
was a commercial commodity for sale.
iii) Whether a picture is obscene or not, is to be
judged in relation to three tests; namely
a) Is it vulgar and indecent?
b) Is it a piece of mere pornography?
c) Is its publication meant merely to make
money by titillating the sex feelings
of adolescents and among whom it is
intended to circulate? In other words,
does it constitute an unwholesome
exploitation for commercial gain. Other
relevant considerations are whether the
picture is relevant to the subject matter
of the magazine. That is to say, whether
its publication serves any preponderating
social or public purpose, in relation to art,
painting, medicine, research or reform of
sex.
iv) A photograph or a painting is a work of art and
the artist enjoys artistic liberty in its portrayal.
40

--- Page 51 ---

However, it is to be understood that a work of
art is enjoyed, judged and appreciated by the
connoisseurs. The pages of a newspaper may
not be the most appropriate place for such
painting.
v) The globalisation and liberalisation does not give
licence to the media to misuse freedom of the press
and to lower the values of the society. The media
performs a distinct role and public purpose which
require it to rise above commercial consideration
guiding other industries and businesses. So far
as that role is concerned, one of the duties of the
media is to preserve and promote our cultural
heritage and social values.
vi) Columns such as ‘Very Personal’ in a newspaper
replying to personal queries of the readers must
not become grossly offensive presentations,
which either outrage public decency or corrupt
public moral.
vii) The attempt of the press should be to ensure
coverage that is in keeping with the norms of the
society at large and not merely a few. It is also
our duty to prevent the degeneration of culture
and standards and press with its reach and impact
carries an immense potential in moulding the
psyche and thought process of a society.
viii) The Indian reader is much more mature and able
to appreciate good journalism and in the long run,
the attempts to copy the west by promoting the
‘so-called popular permissiveness’ may defeat
the very aim of the paper to boost circulation.
41

--- Page 52 ---

ix) The newspaper may expose the instances of
immoral activities in public places through its
writings but with proper caution of restrained
presentation of news or photographic evidence.
x) The newspapers should take due care of
people’s sentiments while publishing articles on
sexuality.
29. Paid News
i) Newspaper should specifically mention
“Marketing Initiative” on Supplement/special
edition itself to distinguish them from various
reports.
ii) The newspaper should not mis-construe or
misquote the statements given by leader. The
statements quoted in editorial should project the
true spirit of what is being tried to be conveyed
by them.
iii) Columns of news items which largely indicate
names of voters on Caste basis and supporters
of the candidate of particular political party,
such tenor and manner of presentation of news
establish the report to be paid news.
iv) Political news published in competing
newspaper with similar content strongly
suggests such reports to be paid news.
v) Two newspapers publishing same news item
verbatim during election days is not accidental
and it is evident that such news items have been
published for consideration.
vi) Manner of presentation of a news item/
photograph that too in favour of a particular
42

--- Page 53 ---

party/candidate as also the appeal for voting in
favour of a particular party is suggestive of paid
news.
vii) Projecting a candidate’s success in Election who
is yet to file a nomination is suggestive of paid
news.
viii) News Reports on Campaign meeting and states
enthusiasm because film stars were present
cannot be termed as paid news.
ix) While covering news on election, the newspapers
are advised to ensure balance in publishing
report/interview of candidates.
x) During the course of election, subject to
conditions laid down by the Election Commission
of India, newspapers are free to make an
honest assessment of prospects of candidates
or the parties and its publication would not
be paid news so long it is not established that
consideration passed on for such publication.
xi) Newspapers shall not publish any news survey
predicting the victory of any political party
without verification of it.
xii) An attempt to influence the voters by projecting
the contesting candidate with all virtues during
the election is paid news.
xiii) A news item giving negative aspect of a candidate
and at the same time the positive aspect of
candidate of other political party without any
basis clearly shows that it is paid news.
43

--- Page 54 ---

30. Parameters of Right of Press to Comment on
Profession
No newspaper(s)/columnist(s) shall abuse any
profession, under the garb of freedom of speech/expression
which is guaranteed under the Indian Constitution, since
freedom of speech is not absolute.
31. Parameters of the Right of the Press to Comment on
the Acts and Conduct of Public Officials
i) So far as the government, local authority and
other organs/institutions exercising govern-
mental power are concerned, they cannot bring
charge of defamation for reports critical of
their acts and conduct relevant to the discharge
of their official duties unless the official
establishes that the publication was made with
reckless disregard for the truth. However,
judiciary, which is protected by the power to
punish for contempt of court, the Parliament
and Legislatures, protected as their privileges
are by Articles 105 and 194 respectively of the
Constitution of India, represent exception to
this rule.
ii) The central and local bodies are not entitled to
bring a civil or criminal action for defamation
in respect of article/report criticising their
functioning.
iii) Publication of news or comments/information
on public officials conducting investigations
should not have a tendency to help the
commission of offences or to impede the
prevention or detection of offences or
44

--- Page 55 ---

prosecution of the guilty. The investigative
agency is also under a corresponding obligation
not to leak out or disclose such information or
indulge in misinformation.
iv) The Official Secrets Act, 1923 or any other
similar enactment or provision having the
force of law equally bind the press or media
though there is no law empowering the state
or its officials to prohibit, or to impose a prior
restraint upon the Press/Media.
v) Those who hold public office and by their own
conduct give scope for criticising them, cannot
be heard to complain against such criticism.
vi) Satirical comments, ridiculing and denigrating
the first citizen of the country are uncalled
for and beyond the call of fair journalistic
comment.
vii) While every journalist has a duty and freedom
of critical evaluation of the functioning of
public department/personnel, such evaluation
has to be based on proper documents and
verification.
viii) It is obligatory on the part of an institution
rendering public service to be open to bonafide
critical examination of its functioning.
32. Paramount National Interest
i) Newspapers shall, as a matter of self-regulation,
exercise due restraint and caution in presenting
any news, comment or information which is
likely to jeopardise, endanger or harm the
45

--- Page 56 ---

paramount interests of the State and society,
or the rights of individuals with respect to
which reasonable restrictions may be imposed
by law on the right to freedom of speech and
expression under clause (2) of Article 19 of the
Constitution of India.
ii) Publication of wrong/incorrect map is a
very serious offence. It adversely affects the
territorial integrity of the country and warrants
prompt and prominent retraction with regrets.
iii) Though the sources normally used are not
to be disclosed, however, in case of serious
allegations where matter is related to national
interest and security it is incumbent/imperative/
mandatory on part of the press to establish
the authenticity of information given by the
source.
iv) An article concerning a sensitive issue which
can defame a nation cannot be published without
thorough verification. Newspaper as well as
News Agency should verify the authenticity of
the article before its publication.
33. Plagiarism
i) Using or passing off the writings or ideas
of another as one’s own, without crediting
the source, is an offence against ethics of
journalism.
ii) Violation of copyright also constitutes violation
of journalistic norms.
iii) Printing a reworded article of a writer by the
paper without acknowledging his work is
unethical.
46

--- Page 57 ---

34. Pre-Publication Verification
i) On receipt of a report or article of public
interest and benefit containing imputations or
comments against a citizen, the editor should
check with due care and attention its factual
accuracy apart from other authentic sources-
with the person or the organisation concerned
to elicit his/her or its version, comments or
reaction and publish the same alongside with
due correction in the report where necessary.
In the event of lack or absence of response, a
footnote to that effect may be appended to the
report.
ii) Publication of news such as those pertaining
to cancellation of examinations or withdrawal
of candidates from election should be
avoided without proper verification and cross
checking.
iii) A document, which forms a basis of a news
report, should be preserved at least for six
months.
iv) Newspaper should carry the Press Release only
after establishing its authenticity which should
bear the signature of authorized signatory and
Departmental seal.
v) News reports that stem from a gossip or so
called roving enquiry affecting the personal
character of an individual, are not worthy of
publication.
vi) Personal animosity should not be reflected in a
news item. Publishing news without any material
47

--- Page 58 ---

even to prima facie substantiate the news item
with a view to malign a person constitute an act
of omission and commission.
vii) Wrongly attributing historically incorrect remarks
of grave nature to a political leader, which have
far reaching repercussions without applying due
diligence calls for severe action. The publication
ought to verify the source of such statement at
pre-publication stage.
viii) Allegations of dowry harassment are subject to
scrutiny by court of law and the changes under
Section 498-A of an I.P.C. should be reported
upon by the media with more sensitivity avoiding
publication of photographs of accused. The editor
in such cases should also verify the stand of the
accused.
ix) Sacking of an officer over graft charges is a
verifiable fact and the newspaper is expected
to carry out such verification. Subsequent
clarifications cannot mitigate the damage.
x) The journalists not volunteering to disclose
the source of stories/articles shall be solely
responsible and liable for correctness and
authenticity of the same.
xi) The journalists volunteering to disclose the
source of stories/articles then the responsibility
and liability shall depend upon the nature of the
source.
xii) If the story has come from reliable sources, that
may be a relevant consideration for deciding the
liability of Journalist(s).
48

--- Page 59 ---

35. Privacy of Public Figures
i) Right to Privacy is an inviolable human right.
However, the degree of privacy differs from
person to person and from situation to situation.
The public person who functions under public
gaze as an emissary/representative of the public
cannot expect to be afforded the same degree of
privacy as a private person. His acts and conduct
as are of public interest (‘public interest’ being
distinct and separate from ‘of interest to public’)
even if conducted in private may be brought to
public knowledge through the medium of the
press. The press has however, a corresponding
duty to ensure that the information about
such acts and conduct of public interest of the
public person is obtained through fair means, is
properly verified and then reported accurately.
For obtaining information in respect of acts
done or conducted away from public gaze, the
press is not expected to use surveillance devices.
For obtaining information about private talks
and discussion while the press is expected not
to badger the public persons, the public persons
are also expected to bring more openness in their
functioning and co-operate with the press in its
duty of informing the public about the acts of
their representatives.
ii) The interviews/articles or arguments pertaining
to public persons which border on events that
are in public knowledge, if reported correctly,
cannot be termed as intrusion into private life.
There is a very thin line between public and
49

--- Page 60 ---

private life and public persons should not be
too thick skinned to criticism.
iii) Newspapers are allowed latitude in criticising
persons who are in seats of power because their
conduct discloses public interest provided their
criticism is not motivated to gratify private spite
of opponent/rival of public figure.
iv) The family of public figures are not valid
journalistic subject, more so if its reporting
covers the minors. If “public interest” overrides
the minor’s right to privacy it will be proper to
seek prior consent of the parents.
v) When the individual concerned himself or
herself reveals facts about private life before a
large gathering then the shield of privacy should
be deemed to be abandoned by the individual.
36. Professional Misconduct
i) Blackmailing or extortion of money from
people under threat of maligning them through
the columns of newspaper amounts to gross
violation of journalistic norms.
ii) The Newspaper should not involve the
journalists in collecting advertisements.
iii) Using the title of some other newspaper by a
media house and declining corrective step is
unethical and reprehensible.
iv) Carrying contents materially different from
those which the contributor provided to the
paper is unethical.
50

--- Page 61 ---

v) Journalists using any platform such as print,
electronic or social media to defame, harass or
blackmail anyone is unethical.
37. Professional Rivalry
Newspaper columns should not be misused by rival
newspapers to gratify their private spite against each other
out of commercial rivalry.
38. Recording Interviews and Phone Conversation
i) The Press shall not tape-record anyone’s
conversation without that person’s knowledge
or consent, except where the recording is
necessary to protect the journalist in a legal
action, or for other compelling good reason.
ii) The Press shall, prior to publication,
delete offensive epithets used during such
conversation.
iii) Newspapers are required to give the context
in which the statement is made by a political
leader, but this does not extend to the liberty of
giving it a meaning of their own.
39. Reporting on:
a) Information about the Mental Health
Patient
The media shall not publish photograph or any other
information in respect of person undergoing treatment
at mental health establishment without the consent of the
person with mental illness.
b) Suicide
Newspapers and news agencies while reporting on
suicide cases shall not:
51

--- Page 62 ---

1. Publish stories about suicide prominently and
unduly repeat such stories;
2. Use language which sensationalize or normal-
ize suicide, or presents it as a constructive
solution to problems;
3. Explicitly describe the method used;
4. Provide details about the site/location;
5. Use sensational headlines;
6. Use photographs, video footage or social media
links.
7*. The press shall restraint and refrain from
printing any news item and/or initiating any
discussion/debate/interview of the nature, as
indicated hereunder:
a. In relation to death by suicide, depicting
the deceased as one having a weak
character or intruding in any manner on
the privacy of the deceased;
b. That causes prejudice to an ongoing
inquiry/investigation by:
(i) Referring to the character of the
accused/victim and creating an
atmosphere of prejudice for both;
(ii) Holding interviews with the victim,
the witness and/or any of his/her
family member(s) and displaying it
on screen;
* Hon’ble High Court of Bombay's order dated 18.01.2021 in PIL (ST) No. 92252.
52

--- Page 63 ---

(iii) Analyzing versions of witnesses,
whose evidence could be vital at the
stage of trial;
(iv) Publishing a confession allegedly
made to a police officer by an accused
and trying to make the public believe
that the same is a piece of evidence
which is admissible before a Court
and there is no reason for the Court
not to act upon it, without letting the
public know the nitty-gritty of the
Evidence Act, 1872;
(v) Printing Photographs of an
accused and thereby facilitating his
identification;
(vi) Criticizing the investigative agency
based on half-baked information
without proper research;
(vii) Pronouncing on the merits of the
case, including pre-judging the guilt
or innocence qua and accused or an
individual not yet wanted in a case,
as the case may be;
(viii) Recreating/reconstructing a crime
scene and depicting how the accused
committed the crime;
(ix) Predicting the proposed/future course
of action including steps that ought to
be taken in a particular direction to
complete the investigation; and
53

--- Page 64 ---

(x) Leaking sensitive and confidential
information from materials collected
by the investigating agency;
c. Acting in any manner so as to violate the
provisions of the Programme Code as
prescribed under section 5 of the Cable
Television Network (Regulation) Act
read with rule 6 of the Cable Television
Network (Regulation) Rules and thereby
inviting contempt of court; and
d. Indulging in character assassination
of any individual and thereby mar his
reputation.
c) Natural Calamities
(i) Facts and data relating to spread
of epidemics or natural calamities
shall be checked up thoroughly from
authentic sources and then published
with due restraint in a manner bereft of
sensationalism, exaggeration, surmises or
unverified facts.
(ii) Natural or man-made hazards become
disasters through acts of commission
and omission of the society. Therefore,
the disastrous impact can be minimized
by preventive action taken by all the
stakeholders including the media.
(iii) Media should give wide publicity to the
do’s and don’ts and the potential benefits
of disaster mitigation so that the society
follows them before, during and after the
54

--- Page 65 ---

occurrence of the disasters. People should
be detailed on standard guidelines. The
issues of children and women which are
the most vulnerable groups during and
after disaster should be handled carefully
by the media.
(iv) It is necessary to have complete
cooperation between the media and all
governmental and non-governmental
agencies. The extent of the coordination
and cooperation between them determines
the nature, the degree and the scale of
the preparedness to prevent or meet the
disasters.
d) Child Abandonment*
All the reporting on Child Abandonment shall
necessarily carry the following:
• Unsafe child abandonment is illegal and
puts child’s life and future at risk.
• A child can be legally and anonymously
relinquished at a specialized adoption
agency.
• A child helpline number shall also be
given.
e) Sex Workers**
The media to take utmost care not to reveal the
identities of sex workers, during arrest, raid and
* The said provisions were adopted by the Council in its Meeting dated 26.10.2021
** In persuance of Hon’ble Supreme Court of India’s order dated 19.05.2022 in the
Criminal Appeal No. 135/2010
55

--- Page 66 ---

rescue operations, whether as victims or accused
and not to publish or telecast any photos that
would result in disclosure of such identities.
Besides, the newly introduced Section 354C,
IPC which makes voyeurism a criminal offence,
should be strictly adhered by the media, so as not
to publish/telecast photos of sex workers with
their clients in the garb of capturing the rescue
operation.
40. Reporting on Proceedings of Legislature
The newspapers have a duty to report faithfully the
proceedings of either House of Parliament, Legislative
Assembly and in this regard the newspapers shall not be
liable for any proceedings civil or criminal in any court
unless it is proved that reporting have been made with
malice. However, the newspapers should not publish any
report based on proceedings of a sitting of either House of
Parliament or Legislative Assembly or as the case may be
either House of the Legislature of a State, which is not open
to the media.
41. Right of Reply
i) The newspaper should promptly and with due
prominence, publish either in full or with due
editing, free of cost, at the instance of the person
affected or feeling aggrieved/or concerned by
the impugned publication, a contradiction/
reply/clarification or rejoinder sent to the editor
in the form of a letter or note. If the editor
doubts the truth or factual accuracy of the
contradiction/reply/clarification or rejoinder,
he shall be at liberty to add separately at the
56

--- Page 67 ---

end, a brief editorial comment doubting its
veracity, but only when this doubt is reasonably
founded on unimpeachable documentary or
other evidential material in his/her possession.
This is a concession which has to be availed
of sparingly with due discretion and caution in
appropriate cases.
ii) However, where the reply/contradiction or
rejoinder is being published in compliance
with the directions of the Press Council, it is
permissible to append a brief editorial note to
that effect.
iii) Right of rejoinder cannot be claimed through the
medium of Press Conference, as publication/
coverage of a news of a conference is within
the discretionary powers of an editor.
iv) Freedom of the Press involves the readers’ right
to know all sides of an issue of public interest.
An editor, therefore, shall not refuse to publish
the reply or rejoinder merely on the ground
that in his opinion the story published in the
newspaper was true. That is an issue to be left
to the judgment of the readers. It also does not
behove an editor to show contempt towards a
reader.
v) The press has to remember that it is not a
prosecutor in any investigation and should be
guided by the paramount principle of a person’s
innocence unless the alleged offence is proved
beyond doubt by independent reliable evidence
and, therefore, even within the constraint of
57

--- Page 68 ---

space, the material facts should find space in
the rejoinder so that the public, as the ultimate
judge of any matter, is guided by the complete
and accurate facts in forming its opinion. The
readers’ right to know all sides of any issue of
public importance is a natural corollary of the
freedom enjoyed by the press in a democracy.
42. Right to Privacy
i) The Press shall not intrude or invade the privacy
of an individual, unless outweighed by genuine
overriding public interest, not being a prurient
or morbid curiosity. So however, that once a
matter becomes a matter of public record,
the right to privacy no longer subsists and it
becomes a legitimate subject for comment
by the Press and the Media, among others.
Special caution is essential in reports likely to
stigmatise women.
Explanation: Things concerning a person’s home,
family, religion, health, sexuality, personal life and private
affairs are covered by the concept of PRIVACY excepting
where any of these impinges upon the public or public
interest.
ii) Caution against Identification: While reporting
crime involving rape, abduction or kidnap of
women/females or sexual assault on children,
or raising doubts and questions touching the
chastity, personal character and privacy of
women, the names, photographs of the victims
58

--- Page 69 ---

or other particulars directly or indirectly*
leading to their identity shall not be published.
iii) Minor children and infants who are the
offspring of sexual abuse or ‘forcible marriage’
or illicit sexual union shall not be identified or
photographed.
iv) Intrusion through photography into moments
of personal grief shall be avoided. However,
photography of victims of accidents or natural
calamity may be in larger public interest.
v) The newspaper is not expected to turn a blind
eye towards the classified advertisements which
are prima-facie in a violation of Suppression of
the Immoral Traffic (Prevention) Act, 1956.
vi) Due care should be applied by the paper by not
disclosing the real names of persons involved
in incident affecting personal lives.
vii) Publishing person’s address in a newspaper
which has no direct relevance to the news
report, is a violation of his right to privacy.
viii) Publishing photograph of police constable
resting in barrack after duty hours, to portray
his shirking from duty not only constitute
invasion of his privacy but also unethical.
43.a) Trial By Media
Introduction
The media and judiciary are two vital pillars of
* Hon’ble Supreme Court of India order dated 2.8.2018 in MA 2069/
2018 in WP No. 473/2005.
59

--- Page 70 ---

democracy and natural allies, one compliments the
other towards the goal of a successful democracy.
Measures which are necessary for due process of law
need to take precedence over freedom of speech. In
a conflict between fair trial and freedom of speech,
fair trial has to necessarily prevail because any
compromise of fair trial for an accused will cause
immense harm and defeat justice delivery system.
Thus, mediapersons should be duly trained and
imparted basic knowledge about functioning of courts
and processes of law;
i) An accused is entitled to the privilege of
presumption of being innocent till guilt is
pronounced by the Court.
ii) The media reports should not induce the general
public to believe in the complicity of the person
indicted as such kind of action brings undue
pressure on the course of fair investigation by
the police.
iii) Publishing information based on gossip about
the line of investigation by the official agencies
on the crime committed gives such publicity to
the incident that may facilitate the person who
indeed committed the crime to move to safer
place.
iv) It is not always advisable to vigorously report
crime related issues on a day to day basis nor
to comment on supposed evidence of the crime
without ascertaining the factual matrix.
v) While media’s reporting at the investigation
stage in a criminal case may ensure a speedy
and fair investigation, disclosure of confidential
60

--- Page 71 ---

information may also hamper or prejudice
investigation. There cannot, therefore, be an
unrestricted access to all the details of the
investigation.
vi) Victim, witnesses, suspects and accused should
not be given excessive publicity as it is amount
to invasion of their privacy rights.
vii) Identification of witnesses by the newspapers/
media endangers them to come under pressure
from both, the accused or his associates as well
as investigative agencies. Thus, media should
not identify the witnesses as they may turn
hostile succumbing to the pressure.
viii) The suspect’s picture should not be shown as
it may create a problem during ‘identification
parades’ conducted under the Code of Criminal
Procedure for identifying the accused.
ix) The media is not expected to conduct its
own parallel trial or foretell the decision
putting undue pressure on the judge, the jury
or the witnesses or prejudice a party to the
proceedings.
x) The reporting on post trial/hearing often consists
of reporting on the decision handed down. But
when there is a time lag between the conclusion of
the proceedings and the decision, the comments
on the concluded proceedings, including
discussion on evidence and/or arguments, aimed
at influencing the forthcoming decision must be
avoided.
61

--- Page 72 ---

xi) Media having reported an initial trial is advised
to follow up the story with publication of final
outcome by the court, whenever applicable.
(b) Guidelines on Sting Operations
i) A newspaper proposing to report a sting
operation shall obtain a certificate from the
person who recorded or produced the same
certifying that the operation is genuine and
bonafide.
ii) There must be concurrent record in writing of the
various stages of the sting operation.
iii) Decision to report the sting operation should be
taken by the editor after satisfying himself of the
public interest of the matter and ensuring that
report complies with all legal requirements.
iv) Sting operation published in print media should
be scheduled with an awareness of the likely
reader in mind. Great care and sensitivity should
be exercised to avoid shocking or offending the
reader.
44. Unauthorised Lifting of News
i) The practice of lifting news from other
newspapers publishing them subsequently
as their own, ill-comports the high standards
of journalism. To remove its unethicality the
‘lifting’ newspaper must duly acknowledge the
source of the report.
ii) The position of features articles is different
from ‘news’: Feature articles shall not be lifted
without permission/proper acknowledgement.
62

--- Page 73 ---

45. Violence not to be Glorified
i) Photo Coverage on Terrorist Attack, Communal
Clashes and Accidents. While reporting news
with regard to terrorist attacks or communal
riots, the media should refrain from publishing/
telecasting pictures of mangled corpses or any
other photographic coverage which may create
terror, or revulsion or ignite communal passion
among people.
ii) Newspapers/Journalists shall avoid presenting
acts of violence, armed robberies and
terrorist activities in a manner that glorifies
the perpetrators on their acts, declarations or
death in the eyes of the public. Publication
of interviews of anti-social elements by the
newspapers glorifying the criminals and their
activities with the resultant effects are to be
avoided.
****
63

--- Page 74 ---

Part B : Guidelines on Specific Issues
a) Norms for Observance by the Press in the
Wake of Communal Disturbances-1969
Recognising that the Press which enjoys the utmost
freedom of expression has a great and vital role to play in
educating and moulding public opinion on correct lines, in
regard to the need for friendly and harmonious relations
between the various communities and religious groups
forming the fabric of Indian political life and in mirroring
the conscience of the best minds of the country to achieve
national solidarity, the Press Council of India considers that
this object would be defeated, communal peace and harmony
disturbed and national unity disrupted if the Press does not
strictly adhere to proper norms and standards in reporting
on or commenting on matters which bear on communal
relations. Without attempting to be exhaustive, the Council
considers the following as offending against journalistic
proprieties and ethics:
1. Distortion or exaggeration of facts or
incidents in relation to communal matters
or giving currency to unverified rumours,
suspicions or inferences as if they were facts
and base their comments on them.
2. Employment of intemperate or unrestrained
language in the presentation of news or
views, even as a piece of literary flourish or
for the purpose of rhetoric or emphasis.
64

--- Page 75 ---

3. Encouraging or condoning violence even
in the face of provocation as a means of
obtaining redress of grievances whether the
same be genuine or not.
4. While it is the legitimate function of the
Press to draw attention to the genuine and
legitimate grievances of any community
with a view to having the same redressed
by all peaceful, legal and legitimate means,
it is improper and a breach of journalistic
ethics to invent grievances, or to exaggerate
real grievances, as these tend to promote
communal ill-feeling and accentuate
discord.
5. Scurrilous and untrue attacks on communi-
ties, or individuals, particularly when this is
accompanied by charges attributing miscon-
duct to them as due to their being members
of a particular community or caste.
6. Falsely giving a communal colour to
incidents which might occur in which
members of different communities happen to
be involved.
7. Emphasising matters that are not to produce
communal hatred or ill-will, or fostering
feelings of distrust between communities.
8. Publishing alarming news which are in
substance untrue or make provocative
comments on such news or even otherwise
calculated to embitter relations between
65

--- Page 76 ---

different communities or regional or linguistic
groups.
9. Exaggerating actual happenings to achieve
sensationalism and publication of news which
adversely affect communal harmony with
banner headlines or in distinctive types.
10. Making disrespectful, derogatory or insulting
remarks on or reference to the different
religions or faiths of their founders.
Guidelines Issued by the Press Council for Observance
by the State Governments and the Media in Relation to
Communal Disturbances 1991:
i. The State Government should take upon
themselves the responsibility of keeping a
close watch on the communal writings that
might spark off tension, destruction and
death, and bring them to the notice of the
Council;
ii. The Government may have occasion to take
action against erring papers or editors. But
it must do so within the bounds of law. If
newsmen are arrested, or search and seizure
operations become necessary, it would be
healthy convention if such developments
could be reported to the Press Council within
24 to 48 hours followed by a detailed note
within a week;
iii. Under no circumstances must the authorities
resort to vindictive measures like cut in
66

--- Page 77 ---

advertisements, cancellation of accreditation,
cut in newsprint quota and other facilities;
iv. Provocative and sensational headlines should
be avoided by the Press;
v. Headings must reflect and justify the master
primed under them;
vi. Figures of casualties given in headlines
should preferably be on the lower side in case
or doubt about their exactness and where the
numbers reported by various sources differ
widely;
vii. Headings containing allegations made in
statements should either identify the person/
body making the allegation or, at least, should
carry quotation marks;
viii. News reports should be devoid of comments
and value judgement;
ix. Presentation of news should not be motivated
or guided by partisan feelings, nor should it
appear to be so;
x. Language employed in writing the news
should be temperate and such as may foster
feelings or amity among communities and
groups;
xi. Corrections should be promptly published
with due prominence and regrets expressed
in serious cases; and
xii. It will help a great deal if in-service training
is given to journalists for inculcation of all
these principles.
67

--- Page 78 ---

Guidelines Issued by the Press Council on January
21-22, 1993 in the Wake of the Ram Janambhoomi - Babri
Masjid Dispute
Guidelines for guarding against the commission of the
following journalistic improprieties and unethicalities:
i. Distortion or exaggeration of facts or incidents
in relation to communal matters or giving
currency to unverified rumours, suspicions or
inferences as if they were facts and base their
comment, on them.
ii. Employment of intemperate or unrestrained
language in the presentation of news or views,
even as a piece of literary flourish or for the
purpose of rhetoric or emphasis.
iii. Encouraging or condoning violence even in
the face of provocation as a means of obtaining
redress of grievance whether the same be
genuine or not.
iv. While it is the legitimate function of the Press
to draw attention to the genuine and legitimate
grievances of any community with a view to
having the same redressed by all peaceful,
legal and legitimate means, it is improper
and a breach of journalistic ethics to invent
grievances, or to exaggerate real grievances,
as these tend to promote communal ill-feeling
and accentuate discord.
v. Scurrilous and untrue attacks on communities,
or individuals, particularly when this is ac-
companied by charges attributing misconduct
68

--- Page 79 ---

to them as due to their being members of a
particular community or caste.
vi. Falsely giving a communal colour to incidents
which might occur in which members of
different communities happen to be involved.
vii. Emphasising matters that are apt to produce
communal hatred or ill-will, or fostering
feelings of distrust between communities.
viii. Publishing alarming news which are in
substance untrue or make provocative
comments on such news or even otherwise
calculated to embitter relations between
different communities or regional or linguistic
groups.
ix. Exaggerating actual happenings to achieve
sensationalism and publication of news which
adversely affect communal harmony with
banner headlines or distinctive types.
x. Making disrespectful, derogatory or insulting
remarks on or reference to the different
religions or faiths of their founders.
b) Coverage of Handouts of Militants/Terrorists -
Guiding Principles - 1991-1992
Arising out of a complaint against publication of
some ULFA handouts/threat notes by a newspaper of Assam,
the Press Council has enunciated some general principles
for the guidance of the press. These are in tune with the
recommendations of the Press Council of India Report on
Punjab and Jammu & Kashmir, adopted by the Press Council
in January, 1991.
69

--- Page 80 ---

These guiding principles considered by the Council in
September 1992, are as follows:
Dictates or “Press Notes” commanding newspapers to
publish them, under duress or threats of dire consequence,
emanating from elements wedded to violence, constitute “the
gravest assault on the freedom of the Press which is one of
the surest guarantors of a democratic and plural society”.
Generally, such dictates or notes are not newsworthy per
se. Their publication tends to demoralise the public and to
affect adversely public, police and security. The publication
not only compromises the freedom and independence of
the newspaper concerned, but also constitutes an offence
against the standards of journalistic ethics and professional
responsibility.
This is not to say that if there is anything newsworthy
in a “Press Note” emanating from any source, it should be
blacked-out altogether, because ‘self-censorship’ may be
“no less dangerous for being insidious”. The essential point
is that editors must exercise due caution and circumspection
in considering the dissemination of such Press Notes. If the
whole of the Note is not pernicious, then it may be edited,
its objectionable portions removed and language toned down
so that whatever is true, newsworthy gets disseminated in
a balanced manner. However, where the “news” and the
objectionable portions are inextricably mixed up, violating
the entire warp and woof of the “Press Note”, it will be
prudent to withhold its publication altogether.
This is not an easy way out, as the media’s experience
of militancy in Punjab has amply demonstrated. More than
50 media personnel have lost their lives in terrorist attacks
and ignoring a militant press note can lead and has often led
70

--- Page 81 ---

to death of innocent and defenceless media persons. Any
show of editorial defence and courage is likely to be seen
by defenceless employees of newspapers as exposing them
to avoidable dangers. Editors and proprietors under these
circumstances have little room for manoeuvres.
A workable expedient that proved useful in Punjab is
for the government to be in close touch with newspapers so
that objectionable and anti-national press notes from groups
swearing by violence could be removed from newspapers
before publication. Even though this may be seen as a form
of pre-censorship, this arrangement saved lives and spared
newspapers from difficult and delicate choices.
There is however a danger of a wilful administration
using this process to muzzle the press and misuse its
authority under the law to define “objectionable material”
on its own terms. Strict procedures must therefore be laid
down. Orders passed under any legislation in this regard
from time to time in relation to publication of allegedly
“objectionable matter” should be subjected to some kind of
appellate review so as to curb any propensity to arbitrary
action. The principal legislation and rules made thereunder
should also be periodically reviewed in the light of changing
circumstances. These safeguards should be built into all such
press legislation.
c) HIV/AIDS and the Media
The Press Council of India under the mandate of
Section 13(2)(b) of the Press Council Act, 1978, has built up
a set of guidelines to facilitate the functioning of the Media.
Of these, the guidelines on coverage of HIV/AIDS related
matter was drawn up in the year 1993.
71

--- Page 82 ---

A writ petition no. CMP 52/2008 was filed by
National Network of Positive People before Hon’ble Court
of Juvenile, Thiruvananthapuram objecting to an incident
relating to visual screened by the media of two children
Bensy and Benson and the subsequent false reporting of
the demise of Bensy, a child with HIV/AIDS. The Hon’ble
Court observed that the Press Council of India should give
appropriate direction to the Media while reporting HIV/
AIDS by them. In pursuance, of this matter the Council
approached the representatives of UNAIDS and activists in
the field to update the guidelines on HIV/AIDS reporting
as the matter has undergone sea change since 1993. The
core group held two workshops on September 18, 2008 and
October 10, 2008 to discuss and debate on the guidelines
formulated and proposed that these guidelines should be
translated into as many languages as possible for the benefit
of the journalists at various levels. These guidelines are
equally relevant to print as well as electronic media.
Be Objective, Factual and Sensitive
Journalists must ensure their story is objective,
factual and sensitive, more so when they are reporting on
HIV and AIDS. They should seek truth and report it in a
balanced manner. Journalists should hold all decision makers
accountable, from government to the pharmaceutical industry
and advocacy groups. They should be engaged with, but not
captive to, any interest group.
This means highlighting positive stories where
appropriate, without underplaying the fact that HIV and
AIDS is a serious issue. Omitting key information because it
doesn’t fit into the story is a breach of faith. The story must
give both sides of the picture. Telling the whole story also
72

--- Page 83 ---

means giving it a human face. The voices of people with HIV
and AIDS must be heard more strongly and they must include
the vulnerable and marginalised people.
The focus should be on facts. Distortion of facts in
any manner to make the story salacious and therefore ‘more
saleable’ is unacceptable. Censorship of relevant information
too, is unethical.
Accuracy is critical since important personal and
policy decisions may be influenced by media reports. In
the context of HIV and AIDS, this means that journalists
need to be very careful about the scientific and medical
details as well as statistics. With the combination of drugs
and treatment regimens available known as antiretroviral
therapy (ART), people infected with HIV can live for
many years before showing any signs of illness. ART is a
combination of drugs that reduces the amount of HIV in the
body (viral load) by interfering with its replication. ART
does not completely destroy the virus or cure the disease.
With reduced virus in the body, the immune system can
become stronger and fight infection more effectively,
resulting in decreased morbidity for the patient. ART has
been shown to benefit both adults and children living with
HIV and AIDS.
Reporting on HIV and AIDS is complex and sorting
through the epidemiological data can be challenging.
Whether using data to support a story or reporting on the data
itself, the specific data chosen and how they are used, will
play a large role in determining what kind of story is told.
In addition, the data is often so complex that there is a risk
of misinterpretation. For example, some reporters may use
‘incidence’ and ‘prevalence’ interchangeably even though
73

--- Page 84 ---

they represent two different ways of measuring the epidemic.
Experts/epidemiologists should be consulted.
Ensure Accurate Language and Terminology
When reporting on HIV and AIDS, language is
extremely important. Journalists should be particularly
careful to get scientific and statistical information right. They
must integrate this with correct terminology. For instance, it is
essential to know and make clear the difference between HIV
and AIDS. Being a syndrome or a collection of symptoms,
AIDS cannot itself be transmitted, nor is there an AIDS virus,
nor an AIDS carrier. Similarly, a person either does or does
not have AIDS. Since there are no degrees of AIDS, the
expression ‘full-blown AIDS’ is meaningless.
With effective treatments now available, HIV
infection does not necessarily lead to AIDS. It is important
to reflect this in reportage. Since HIV is not synonymous
with AIDS, ‘HIV/AIDS’ as a term is no longer considered
accurate.
With AIDS not being a singular disease but a syndrome
defined by a variety of diseases and cancers, a person does
not ‘die of AIDS’. It would instead be accurate to report that
he or she died of an HIV-related illness.
Terminology used must be appropriate and non-
stigmatising. The media must cross check changes in
terminology and language. Terms like ‘scourge’ to describe
the infection have been discarded. Other terms like AIDS
carrier, prostitute, drug addict, AIDS patient/victim/sufferer
also lead to stigma and should not be used.
Debunk Myths Related to Prevention of HIV and Miracle
Cures
The press should take care not to promote myths
74

--- Page 85 ---

related to prevention and transmission of HIV or to claims
that advertise protection from the infection. Nor should
it give any credence to traditional cures that have no
scientific verification. False hopes are raised by reporting
claims around cures. Researchers have been working hard
for decades yet there is no known cure for HIV or AIDS
although the infection is treatable with a positive impact
on the quality of life. The media should include telephone
numbers of HIV and AIDS helplines/counselling services.
Advertisements related to HIV, STIs, skin diseases,
tuberculosis and other opportunistic infections can be
potentially misleading and should be carefully checked.
Make Photographs, Illustrations and Cartoons Positive
Visuals have an immediate impact on audiences and
are important to highlight stories. But the use of photographs
in HIV and AIDS stories raise a lot of ethical issues. Care
should be taken to ensure that photographs do not breach
the confidentiality or privacy of infected people and their
families.
Avoid photos that promote stereotypes related to HIV
and AIDS and those that victimize the infected. Care should
be taken to ensure that captions to photographs are factually
correct and do not increase stigma.
Illustrations and cartoons also should avoid any
negative implications.
For Visual Media
The visual media must deal sensitively and ethically
with the identities of those who have HIV and AIDS as well
as their families and associates. Care must be taken during
75

--- Page 86 ---

interviews, off-the-record conversations, while taking
photographs and recording their stories so that identity is kept
confidential.
Some Pointers:
l Keep the camera away from focusing directly on the
face of person/case study. Instead, shoot hands, feet
or back of the head;
l Shoot in silhouette, keeping the camera behind the
subject;
l Since voice can also be an identifying factor, ask
questions softly so that the replies are soft. In most
cases, superimposition of subtitles should be used so
that the audio does not need to be upped too much;
Do not show pictures of the family. These too can
lead to identification of the person;
l Try to keep the location of the shoot ambiguous. For
instance, avoid naming the village;
l Establish the concerned person’s journey through a
third party’s voice whenever possible;
l An interview should be a one-to-one chat that allows
the person to speak. Ensure questions are not deeply
personal or accusatory. It should not put the person
on the defensive;
l Hidden cameras should never be used;
Try to show people living with HIV in a positive
light by portraying them as individuals instead of
‘victims’;
l Wherever possible, obtain written consent;
76

--- Page 87 ---

Even with permission, it may be best not to disclose the
infected person’s identity. The repercussions and pressures of
being revealed on TV particularly can be terrible, especially
for the family. The stigma gets heightened. In many cases
permission to shoot openly is given without understanding
the power of the visual media.
The person may feel safe appearing on TV in Delhi,
away from their community, not realizing the possibility that
their family is watching the story in a village/town far away.
For news Desk including Sub-editors and Newsroom
Staff
Special attention must be paid by the news desk and
newsroom staff to ensure that the eye-catching headlines
reflect the issue accurately and that the story is balanced and
free of damaging stereotypes.
Uphold Confidentiality and Obtain Informed Consent
Journalists should not disclose the identity of the person
infected with HIV unless they have specific permission to do
so. Whenever possible, they should get written consent.
If written consent is not possible, informed consent
must be obtained. This means ensuring that people living
with HIV and AIDS (PLHIVs) are aware of the implications
of their identification.
The moral and professional responsibility of the
story should be that of the journalist. Therefore, the
journalist must exercise caution and use his/her judgment
on how PLHIVs are to be portrayed. To minimize damaging
repercussions, it would be best to avoid identification even
when written consent is obtained. This can be done by
changing names and locations in the story.
77

--- Page 88 ---

Avoid Discrimination
Journalists should avoid references to caste, gender
or sexual orientation when reporting HIV and AIDS. Such
references entrench existing prejudices against sexual
minorities, certain communities or groups already targetted,
Journalists should avoid references to caste, gender or sexual
orientation when reporting HIV and AIDS. Such references
entrench existing prejudices against sexual minorities, certain
communities or groups already targetted, be the men who
have sex with men (MSM), injecting drug users (IDUs), sex
workers or migrants.
Sexual minorities includes people who are lesbian,
gay, bisexual and transgender (LGBT) and covers men,
women and all those who do not identify either as men or
women (that is, transgender). Among the transgender are
hijras. Hijras are essentially biological born males who do
not identify as men and prefer to identify as women.
It is important to understand that MSMs may never
identify as homosexual. Therefore, the word MSM is used to
denote behaviour only. So it is appropriate to say Oscar Wilde
was a gay man and not Oscar was gay.
Sexual minorities are sometimes derisively referred to
by terms which reinforce stereotypes about the community.
Instead, it would be more appropriate to use terms like sexual
minorities, gay man or lesbian. It is not necessary to call them
that either as long as one does not stigmatise them.
While information about modes of transmission are
important, instead of making value judgements the reports
should try to focus on how the infection affects people, their
work, their families and the gaps in policy and implementation
of HIV programmes. Focusing needlessly on how a person
78

--- Page 89 ---

was infected reinforces an attitude that seeks to blame those
with HIV or AIDS for being infected.
Care should be taken to ensure that a particular
region’s language, cultural norms and traditional practices
are understood and accurately reported.
Ensure Gender Sensitive Reporting
The media must guard against gender stereotyping.
It must not stigmatize HIV positive women. For instance,
portraying sex workers and bar girls as being responsible
for spreading the infection is common. Instead, stories
should explore how the infection makes women particularly
vulnerable to different forms of exploitation. Stories must
focus on how it is possible to live a productive and reasonably
normal life with HIV, about the inherent strength that enables
women to shoulder challenges and about the ethical and legal
rights of sex workers.
Stories should also focus on the new technology and
medication available for prevention of infection from mother
to child and the fact that infected women can have children
who may be free of the infection.
An example of gender sensitive reportage is the use
of PPTCT (Prevention of Parent to Child Transmission)
instead of PMTCT (Prevention of Mother to Child
Transmission). This way the report does not hold the mother
solely responsible for passing the infection.
Ensure Sensitivity on Child-Related Stories
The identity of children infected and affected by
HIV should not be revealed. Nor should their photographs
be shown. This includes orphans and children living in
orphanages, juvenile homes etc.
79

--- Page 90 ---

International and national laws specifically prohibit
publication of any information or photograph that may
lead to the identification of these children and violate their
rights.
In India, the Juvenile Justice (Care and Protection
of Children) Act, 2000 lays down that no report in any
newspaper, magazine or visual media regarding a juvenile
in need of care and protection shall disclose the name,
address, school or any other particulars that lead to their
identification. It also prohibits the publication of any
photograph related to the child.
Journalists must also be sensitive to the fact that a
child may or may not be aware of her/his HIV status. This
fact must be ascertained before the journalist gets into the
process of enquiry. This is of prime importance as some
questions can be perceived as intrusive or insensitive and
can leave a lasting impression on the child.
Keeping that in mind, it is nevertheless important
for children to participate in matters that concern them.
However, their identities must be protected while sharing
their views/stories.
The fact that paediatric doses of ART medication are
now available must be widely disseminated.
Ensure Balanced and Responsible Coverage
News organisations should take the initiative to
lessen the impact of a ‘negative’ story such as suicide due
to HIV- related illness by carrying statements from positive
people who have faced the challenge successfully or by
giving helpline numbers.
Care should be taken that stories on infected
individuals are not sensationalized. The stories should avoid
80

--- Page 91 ---

falling into the trap of projecting infected persons as either
‘victims’ or ‘culprits’.
When reporting on specific professional groups such
as uniformed services, health professionals etc, care should
be taken to obtain data from authorised sources. Inaccurate
reports will have an adverse impact on their morale and
will also increase stigma. Such reports will also create
an impression of lack of confidentiality that will hinder
voluntary testing.
Ensure Regular Training on HIV and AIDS for Media
Journalists must keep abreast of the changing realities
of this fast-evolving infection. News organizations across
the country must actively encourage training workshops
and modules on the issue. Journalists should also keep
themselves updated on court judgements related to the
issue.
HIV is no longer just a health issue. Instead of
concentrating on health reporters alone, people at all levels
of the news organization should be trained and sensitised on
the various dimensions, especially terminology of HIV and
AIDS. The infection impacts on the country’s development,
economics, business and politics. Surveys have shown that
with training and sensitization, media reportage on HIV
and AIDS, particularly in high-prevalence states, has been
relatively more balanced and accurate.
Adopt Existing Stylebook or Guidelines on HIV and
AIDS Reportage
News organisations should adopt and widely
disseminate existing standardised guidelines and terminology
on reporting on HIV and AIDS. This will encourage
responsible coverage of the issue.
81

--- Page 92 ---

APPENDIX 1
UNAIDS TERMINOLOGY GUIDELINES
www.unaids.org
APPENDIX 2
CODE FOR SELF-REGULATION IN ADVERTISING BY
THE ADVERTISEMENT STANDARDS COUNCIL OF
INDIA (ASCI)
www.asci.co.in
APPENDIX 3
HIV/AIDS AND THE LAW – A JUDICIAL COLLOQUIUM
BY HUMAN RIGHTS LAW NETWORK (HRLN)
www.hrln.org
82

--- Page 93 ---

CONSENT FORM
I, ____________________________________Son/Daughter of,
am a responsible adult/Parent/legal guardian of
Aged years, agree that you (name of interviewer/
photographer) and your photographer/ cameraman have my
permission to record my statement/interview and take my
photograph for print/audio visual media, on HIV and AIDS
related issues.
I understand that my statement/interview will not be
distorted or misused in any way wherever it is used. The
photographer will also ensure that photographs do not breach
my confidentiality or that of my family.
You will also ensure that statement/interview taken of_______
________________________________(name of interviewee),
who is a minor, does not reveal his/her identity in any way.
It has also been explained to me in my language (—————)
that there could be a potential fallout of my statement that could
include stigma and discrimination directed towards me, my
family members, relatives and friends.
ADDRESS:
Phone:
DATE:
SIGNATURE:
83

--- Page 94 ---

d) Financial Journalism – 1996
The Press Council of India has counselled reporters/
financial journalists/newspaper establishments to refrain
from receiving any gifts/grants/concessions/facilities, etc.,
either in cash or kind which are likely to compromise free
and unbiased reporting on financial matters.
1. The Council in its Report has observed that the
financial journalists today enjoy considerable
influence over readers’ minds and, therefore, they
owe it to them to present a balanced and objective
view of the financial dealings, status and prospects
of a company. It observed that some companies are
given excessive news coverage in the newspapers/
magazines because they have issued advertisements
to that print media. Sometimes, adverse reports are
published of those companies which do not give
advertisements to the newspapers or magazines.
Again, when a media is not happy with any company/
management for whatever reason, the negative
aspects of the company are highlighted, while in the
reverse situation, no negative aspects are brought
to light. Some companies are also known to give
gifts, loans, discounts, preferential shares, etc., to
certain financial journalists to receive favourable
and positive reports of the companies. At the same
time, there is no mechanism for investors’ education
or for raising public opinion against such unhealthy
practices.
2. The Council feeling concerned over the
malpractice in the Corporate Sector and after
holding detailed deliberations and discussions
84

--- Page 95 ---

with the representatives of financial institutions
and journalists, has recommended the guidelines
enumerated below for observance by the financial
journalists.
3) The financial journalists should not accept gifts,
loans, trips, discounts, preferential shares or other
considerations which compromise or are likely to
compromise his position.
4) It should be mentioned prominently in the report
about any company that the report is based on
information given by the company or the financial
sponsors of the company.
5) When the trips are sponsored for visiting
establishments of a company, the author of the report
who has availed of the trip must state invariably that
the visit was sponsored by the company concerned
and that it had also extended the hospitality as the
case may be.
6) No matter related to the company should be published
without verifying the facts from the company and
the source of such report should also be disclosed.
7) A reporter who exposes a scam or brings out a report
for promotion of a good project should be encouraged
and awarded.
8) A journalist who has financial interests such as share
holdings, stock holdings, etc., in a company, should
not report on that company.
9) The journalist should not use for his own benefit
or for the benefit of his relations and friends,
85

--- Page 96 ---

information received by him in advance for
publication.
10) No newspaper owner, editor or anybody connected
with a newspaper should use his relations with the
newspaper to promote his other business interests.
11) Whenever there is an indictment of a particular
advertising agency or advertiser by the Advertising
Council of India, the newspaper in which the
advertisement was published must publish the news
of indictment prominently.
e) Election Reporting-1996
i) General Election is a very important feature of
our democracy and it is imperative that the media
transmits to the electorate fair and objective reports
of the election campaign by the contesting parties.
Freedom of the Press depends to a large measure
on the Press itself behaving with a sense of
responsibility. It is, therefore, necessary to ensure
that the media adheres to this principle of fair and
objective reporting of the election campaign.
The Press Council has, therefore, formulated the
following guidelines to the media for observance
during elections:
1. It will be the duty of the Press to give objective
reports about elections and the candidates.
The newspapers are not expected to indulge
in unhealthy election campaigns, exaggerated
reports about any candidate/party or incident
during the elections. In practice, two or three
closely contesting candidates attract all the
86

--- Page 97 ---

media attention. While reporting on the actual
campaign, a newspaper may not leave out
any important point raised by a candidate and
make an attack on his or her opponent.
2. Election campaign along communal or caste
lines is banned under the election rules. Hence,
the Press should eschew reports which tend to
promote feelings of enmity or hatred between
people on the ground of religion, race, caste,
community or language.
3. The Press should refrain from publishing
false or critical statements in regard to
the personal character and conduct of any
candidate or in relation to the candidature
or withdrawal of any candidate or his
candidature, to prejudice the prospects of
that candidate in the elections. The Press
shall not publish unverified allegations
against any candidate/party.
4. The Press shall not accept any kind of
inducement, financial or otherwise, to project
a candidate/party. It shall not accept hospitality
or other facilities offered to them by or on
behalf of any candidate/party.
5. The Press is not expected to indulge in
canvassing of a particular candidate/party. If
it does, it shall allow the right of reply to the
other candidate/party.
6. The Press shall not accept/publish any
advertisement at the cost of public exchequer
regarding achievements of a party/ government
in power.
87

--- Page 98 ---

7. The Press shall observe all the directions/
orders/instructions of the Election Commis-
sion/Returning Officers or Chief Electoral
Officer issued from time to time.
ii) Guidelines on ‘Pre-poll’ and ‘Exit-polls’ Survey-1996
The Press Council of India having considered the
question of desirability or otherwise of publication of
findings of pre-poll surveys and the purpose served by them
is of the view that the newspapers should not allow their
forum to be used for distortions and manipulations of the
elections and should not allow themselves to be exploited
by the interested parties.
The Press Council, therefore, advises that in view
of the crucial position occupied by the electoral process
in a representative democracy like ours, the newspapers
should be on guard against their precious forum being
used for distortions and manipulations of the elections.
This has become necessary to emphasize today since the
print media is sought to be increasingly exploited by the
interested individuals and groups to misguide and mislead
the unwary voters by subtle and not so subtle propaganda
on casteist, religious and ethnic basis as well as by the use
of sophisticated means like the alleged pre-poll surveys.
While the communal and seditious propaganda is not
difficult to detect in many cases, the interested use of the
pre-poll survey, sometimes deliberately planted, is not so
easy to uncover. The Press Council, therefore, suggests
that whenever the newspapers publish pre-poll surveys,
they should take care to preface them conspicuously by
indicating the institutions which have carried such surveys,
the individuals and organisations which have commissioned
the surveys, the size and nature of sample selected, the
88

--- Page 99 ---

method of selection of the sample for the findings and the
possible margin of error in the findings.
1. Further in the event of staggered poll dates, the media
is seen to carry exit-poll surveys of the polls already
held. This is likely to influence the voters where the
polling is yet to commence. With a view to ensure
that the electoral process is kept pure and the voters’
minds are not influenced by any external factors, it
is necessary that the media does not publish the exit-
poll surveys till the last poll is held.
2. The Press Council, therefore, requests the Press to
abide by the following guideline in respect of the
exit polls:
Guideline:
No newspaper shall publish exit-poll surveys,
however, genuine they may be, till the last of the polls is
over.
f) Guidelines on Undue Favours to
Journalists -1988
The power of the press has prompted the public men
through the ages to try to cultivate and curry its favours
through overt, and more often than not, covert means.
It is only if the press accepts its responsibility of
serving the public interest as an independent observer,
informer and educator of people as a watchdog of the interest
of the society that it can discharge its true role as a mass
communicator. Ultimately the strength of the moral fabric of
the press itself shall decide whether or not to be swayed by
the inducements and enticements thrown in its way by those
in power. The media persons must realise that the burden of
89

--- Page 100 ---

whether favours and facilities they receive, whether they are
showered on them by the public or the private organisations
or the individuals in authority, is ultimate borne by the
people. The private organisations recover their costs by
adding to the cost of the products and services they sell. The
ultimate by allegiance of the press has therefore to be of the
people and not to immediate benefactors.
To distinguish between the facilities made available
to the members of the fourth estate for due discharge of
their professional duties and favours granted with a view to
influence them, is not always easy. However, the simple and
intelligible demarcation may be a uniform profferment of
help to journalists in discharge of their professional duties
made within the parameters of well laid down policies,
without discrimination from person to person constitutes
facility but when it is restricted to any or some individuals
or establishments, it becomes a favour.
Based on the report given out by the Council in
January 1998 in favour extended to journalists by various
authorities over the period 1985 to 1995, the Council has
framed the following guidelines for future guidance:
1. Accommodation-houses/flats/land:
The Government is not obliged to provide
accommodation to the journalists as it is the responsibility
of the newspaper establishment to provide accommodation
to their employees. Whenever such a facility is provided
to the journalists by the authorities it should be gradually
phased out.
Land allotments at concessional rates to the
newspaper establishment/individuals for the purpose of
90

--- Page 101 ---

installing printing presses should not be a source of undue/
illegal enrichment of the allottees.
Therefore, the proposal of allotment of land to
newspaper establishment/individuals should be scrutinized
by the authorities very carefully. No land should be allotted
to newspaper establishments/individuals at concessional
rates if the land is proposed to be put to commercial use as
well along with its use for press purpose by the allottees.
2. Allotment of Shares in Companies:
The shares allotted at a special price or given under
any quota is a favour.
3. Bus Travel/Rail Travel/Transport:
This is a favour so far as big and medium newspapers
are concerned. Further the journalists attached to the
newspapers which are in profit have no justification for
availing free bus/rail/transport facility. Such costs must be
borne by the concerned newspaper. However, in the case of
small newspaper this may constitute a facility.
4. Foreign Travel:
Extending the facility of air travel by companies,
corporations and airlines is an inducement to write
favourably about their products and services. As regards
official foreign tours undertaken by the President, the Vice
President, the Prime Minister and the External Affairs
Minister or any other Minister, only eligible journalist
should be nominated for coverage once the newspaper has
been selected on the basis of the criteria laid down. The
management personnel of the newspapers should not be
selected/nominated for coverage of such tours.
91

--- Page 102 ---

5. Free Air Tickets by Domestic Travel Airlines and
Others:
It induces journalists to write favourable reports
to commercially promote the airlines and the commercial
enterprise offering such tickets and should not be accepted
by the journalists.
6. Cash Disbursement from Chief Minister ’s
Discretionary Fund:
Disbursement of money from the Discretionary
Fund of the Chief Minister other than by way of relief to the
indignant and helpless journalists encourages unfaithfulness
to the mission of journalism and promotes corrupt practices.
This could be discouraged by the Chief Ministers.
7. Cash Disbursement Financial Assistance:
The financial assistance, even if given for medical
treatment, constitute a favour, unless, medical aid is given
under a clear cut policy uniformly applicable to the destitutes
or sick persons who cannot afford the medical treatment,
and the journalists happens to be one of such beneficiaries.
Extending CGHS facility to journalists is illogical since this
facility to its employees is the responsibility of the newspaper
establishments and should be provided by the authorities.
8-9. Funds for media centres and grants to journalist
associations is favour and should be discontinued,
unless it is given for promoting the journalistic
skills.
10. Gift cheques including those given by the
advertisement agencies for publication of material
relating to their clients or otherwise is a favour and
92

--- Page 103 ---

deserve outright condemnation. The journalists
should not accept them.
11. Gifts in any form, irrespective of their value, are to
be condemned.
12. Free parking is a favour, if journalist uses this facility
for the purpose other than his professional work.
13. Guest Hospitality:
The working journalists, as a rule should not be treated
as State Guests. However, when Press teams are invited to
a place to discharge their professional duties, making due
arrangements for them would be an exception. The stay
in government guest houses by accredited journalists, is
permissible if it is for discharging professional duties.
14. Import of duty free cameras and computers:
It is the duty of the newspaper establishment to
provide cameras/computers to its personnel. Allowing duty
free cameras and computers to a particular class of persons
by the Government is a favour. However, this facility may
be extended to the accredited freelance journalists, small
newspapers, provided it is not misused.
15. Insurance Premium:
It is not for the government to pay premium of the
insurance of the journalists. The newspaper establishments
or the individual concerned should make the payment of the
same.
16. Giving jobs to journalist’s relatives, for
considerations, other than on merits is an outright
attempt to induce and should be curbed.
93

--- Page 104 ---

17. The grant of loans within the ambit of a policy
already laid down for all citizens is permissible.
But when the loan is given only to journalists or at
reduced rates of interests or when the interest due or
the principal amount is waived/written off/condoned,
such a practice amounts to undue favour and should
be stopped.
18. Nomination on Committees:
In some states the journalists are nominated on
some organisations and institutions like Public Service
Commission and are also given the status of State Minister
or Cabinet Minister, which is a wrong practice. Except for
nomination by professional organisations on Committees,
which have a quota to represent the various professions, this
practice constitutes a favour and should be stopped.
19. Allotting PCO/Fax/Phone booth or centre to a
journalist is a favour. This practice should be
stopped.
20. Pensionary Benefits:
Since the media is not part of the government, the
benefit given only to media persons constitutes a favour
when extended by the government.
21. Press Clubs-Donation of Funds:
This practice is prevalent all over the country
and funds are being donated lavishly by Chief Ministers/
Ministers, political leaders, companies and corporations not
only to genuine Press Clubs but also to the Press Clubs of
dubious nature. In the latter case it constitutes an attempt to
induce the journalists to give favourable reports about the
donors. This should be stopped.
94

--- Page 105 ---

22. Prizes:
The practice of giving spurious awards has to be
curbed. There are instances of sale of awards and prizes
by the racketeers making money out of it. Not only the
racketeers but the awardees often contribute towards the
value of the prize.
23. Allotment of shops to persons for reasons of their
position as journalist is a clear cut favour and should
be stopped forthwith.
24. The grant of Accreditation Cards, Government
and Public Authority Advertisements according to
rules, facility during election meeting, expenses for
journalistic conventions, seminars, etc. providing
press rooms, inviting press parties, giving publication
material, providing for training of journalists do
not constitute favours. They are essential facilities
offered to journalists for the discharge of their
professional duties.
g) Right to Privacy - Public Figures and the
Press-1998
The issue has been under heated debate at both
national and international level. It appears certain that right
to privacy cannot be absolute, yet the media itself has to
show self-restraint, and respect the privacy of the public
figures. Where there is clash between the public person’s
privacy and public’s right to know about his personal
conduct, activities, habits and traits of character, impinging
upon or having a bearing on public interest, the former must
yield to the latter.
95

--- Page 106 ---

It will, however, be necessary to bear that what is
of ‘interest to the public’ is not synonymous with ‘public
interest’ and that must be the ultimate test that the journalists
must themselves apply in the circumstances of each
individual case.
Drawing out of the above, the Council draws up the
following guidelines:
“Right to privacy is an inviolable human right.
However, the degree of privacy differs from person
to person and from situation to situation. The public
persons who function under public gaze as an emissary/
representative of the public cannot expect to be afforded
the same degree of privacy as a private person. His acts
and conduct as are of public interest (‘public interest’ being
distinct and separate from ‘of interest to the public’) even if
conducted in private may be brought to public knowledge
through the medium of the press. The press has, however,
a corresponding duty to ensure that the information about
such acts and conduct of public interest of the public person
is obtained through fair means, is properly verified and
then reported accurately. For obtaining the information in
respect of acts done or conducted away from public gaze,
the press is not expected to use surveillance devices. For
obtaining information about private talks and discussions,
while the press is expected not to badger the public
persons, the public persons are also expected to bring more
openness in their functioning and co-operate with the press
in its duty of informing the public about the acts of their
representatives.”
The above broad guidelines emulated in true spirit
are certain to strike a balance between the right of the press
96

--- Page 107 ---

to have access to information and the public persons’ right
to privacy.
h) Model Guidelines for Publishing Overseas
Advertisements in Accordance with
Emigration Act, 1983
The Information and Broadcasting Ministry requested
the Council to issue guideline for the publishers in wake of
advertisements of overseas jobs being published in various
newspapers in contravention of Emigration Act, 1983.
The Council in consultation with the Protector General of
Emigration adopted the following model guidelines:
1. As per the provisions of Section 16 of the Emigration
Act, 1983, no employer can recruit any citizen
of India for employment in any country or place
outside India except (a) through a recruiting agent
competent under the Act to make such recruitment,
or (b) in accordance with a valid permit issued in
this behalf.
2. Section 10 of the Emigration Act, 1983, provides that
no recruiting agent shall commence or carry on the
business of recruitment of Indian citizens for overseas
employment except under and in accordance with
the certificate issued by the registering authority,
i.e., Protector General of Emigrants in the Ministry
of Overseas Indian Affairs.
3. Similarly, a foreign employer or a project exporter
can recruit Indian citizens for employment abroad
only after obtaining permit from the Indian Mission
in the country of employment or the Ministry of
Overseas Indian Affairs, New Delhi.
97

--- Page 108 ---

4. It is mandatory for the Registered Recruiting Agents
to display their registration certificate number while
inserting advertisement for recruitment. Similarly,
Foreign Employers and Project Exporters will also
have to indicate permit number while inserting
advertisements.
5. A copy of the registration certificate in case of
recruiting agents and permit letter in case of foreign
employers and project exporters may be asked to
be attached with the advertisement form as proof of
their being genuine persons.
6. All advertisers may be asked to mention the following
in their advertisement:
a. Registration Certificate Number/Permit
Number;
b. Full address with Telephone Number, Post
Box Number, e-mail address (These could be
given in addition to the full address but not
as the mode of communication);
c. No fee towards processing application or for
any other purpose shall be charged from the
applicant;
d. Name of the Posts/Jobs;
e. Number of Position/vacancies in each
category; and
f. The salary offered to each category of job.
7. In case of any doubt, the publisher may also ask for
Copies of Demand Letter and Power of Attorney
supposed to have been given by the foreign employer
98

--- Page 109 ---

or sponsor to an agent, on the basis of which the said
advertisement is being released.
8. Also clarifications may be sought from the Protector
General of Emigrants, Ministry of Overseas Indian
Affairs, New Delhi or from the eight Offices of the
Protector of Emigrants located at Delhi, Mumbai,
Chennai, Kolkata, Thiruvananthapuram, Cochin,
Chandigarh and Hyderabad.
9. Further, the list of registered recruiting agents
can also be seen in the website of the Ministry of
Overseas Indian affairs, i.e.https://moia.gov.in.
i) Guidelines for Protection of Child Rights
Guidelines Drawn up for Reporting on Children:
1. Do not further stigmatize any child; avoid
categorisations or descriptions that expose a
child to negative reprisals including additional
physical or psychological harm, or to lifelong
abuse, discrimination or rejection by their local
communities.
2. Always provide an accurate context for the child’s
story or image.
3. Always describe the child as victim.
4. Obscure the visual identity of any child who is
identified as:
i. A victim of sexual abuse or exploitation,
ii. A perpetrator of physical or sexual abuse,
iii. HIV positive, or living with AIDS, unless
the child, a parent or a guardian gives fully
informed consent,
99

--- Page 110 ---

iv. Charged or convicted of a crime.
In certain circumstances of risk or potential
risk of harm or retribution, change the name
and obscure the visual identity of any child
who is identified as:
a. A current or former child combatant,
b. An asylum seeker, a refugee or an
internal displaced person.
5. In certain cases, using a child’s identity - their name
and/or recognizable image - is in the child’s best
interests. However, when the child’s identity is
used, they must still be protected against harm and
supported through any stigmatization or reprisals.
Some examples of these special cases are:
i. When a child initiates contact with the reporter
wanting to exercise their right to freedom of
expression and their right to have their opinion
heard.
ii. When a child is part of a sustained programme
of activism or social mobilization and wants to
be so identified.
iii. When a child is engaged in a psychosocial
programme and claiming their name and
identity is part of their healthy development.
6. Confirm the accuracy of what the child has to say,
either with other children or an adult, preferably,
with both.
7. When in doubt about whether a child is at risk,
report on the general situation for children rather
100

--- Page 111 ---

than on an individual child, no matter how
newsworthy the story.
j) Model Accreditation/Advertisement Rules - 2014
1. These Rules formulated by the Press Council of
India will serve as the guideline for framing and
implementing the Rules of Accreditation of the
Central and State Governments. These Model Rules
have been framed to ensure accreditation-to cover
the news relating to the Central/State Government–
is granted and renewed with fairness, transparency,
with commitment to freedom of press, and in public
interest.
2. Definitions:
i) Accreditation: Recognition granted to
Correspondents/Editors of Media organisations
(as defined in sub clause iv) to have access
to news materials, written and pictorial; to
offices and officers of the Government at the
Headquarters and other centres for gathering
news; access for laws, rules, notifications,
press releases, background papers, etc. of the
activities of the government; for invitations and
admittance without any hindrance to functions,
press conferences, statutory events and other
activities of the government; facilities in
terms of travel, research, documentation, etc.
relating to newsgathering. The Accreditation
should be available throughout the country,
state, city, district or tehsil, as decided by the
Committee.
101

--- Page 112 ---

ii) Correspondent: A working journalist
employed by a newspaper, magazine, news
agency, television channel, radio organization
or news portal, to gather and file news items
regularly for the newspaper, magazine,
television channel, radio organisation or news
portal, as defined in clause 2 (iv) of these rules.
The definition of Working Journalist for print
media, including newspapers, magazines and
news agencies, shall be generally the same as
the definition in the Working Journalist Act.
iii) Cameramen: Still and Television cameramen
employed by media organisations for taking
picture or video-graph news events.
iv) Editor: Editor of a newspaper, magazine,
Television Channel, Radio organization, news
portal, who is in-charge of news selection and
editorial policy of the organization, including
Chief Editor, Editor-in-Chief, Managing
Editor, Executive Editor, Resident Editor,
Content Head.
v) Media Organization: Newspaper, magazine,
Television Channels, Radio organization, news
portal, recognised by Government of India/
State Government agencies under relevant laws
and rules like PRB Act, Uplinking Guidelines
for Television Channels and FM Stations,
Prasar Bharti Act, etc.
(a) News Media shall include newspapers,
wire service and non-wire service news
agencies, news feature agencies, electronic
102

--- Page 113 ---

media agencies, news portals containing
news and comments on public news.
(b) Newspaper shall have the same definition
as given in the Press and Registration of
Books Act, 1867. A Daily newspaper shall
be published on not less than five days in a
week; a weekly or Fortnightly newspaper
shall have not less than 45 or 22 issues in a
year respectively.
(c) News Agency shall be wire and
non-wire organizations which supply news
on a minute-to-minute or daily basis to a
number of media organizations, both print
and electronic.
(d) News Feature Agencies shall be agencies
which supply news and features based on
current affairs to newspaper organizations
on a weekly or fortnightly basis.
(e) Radio Organization means any media
organization which broadcast news bulletins
and carries current affairs programmes,
including All India Radio which operates
under the Prasar Bharti Act.
(f) Television Channel shall have the same
meaning as News and Current Affairs
Channels permitted under the Guidelines
of the Ministry of Information and
Broadcasting. This includes the news
channels of Doordarshan operating under
the Prasar Bharti Act.
103

--- Page 114 ---

(g) Television and Radio news agency shall
be media organization which provides
news clips and feeds to Television channels
and radio stations.
(h) Foreign Newspapers and foreign news
agencies shall be media organisation which
fulfil broadly the criteria laid out in clause
2 (b) and 2 (c) respectively.
(i) Foreign television channel shall be
media organisation which fulfils broadly
the criteria laid out in the Guidelines for
News and Current Affairs Channels of the
Ministry of Information and Broadcasting.
(j) News Portals are news and current
websites which provide continuous news
coverage and current affairs features.
vi) Accreditation Card: The PIB or the State
Information Department shall issue a photo
identity card to all correspondents and editors
to whom the accreditation is granted by the
Committee, and wherever necessary, the card
should have authorization to enter all premises
of the Central and State Governments, without
any requirement of obtaining visitor pass.
vii) Committee: Committee formed by the
Government for considering and sanctioning
of Accreditation, and to recommend steps for
facilities for news gathering by accredited
correspondents and news organisations. State
Governments shall form District or Tehsil
104

--- Page 115 ---

(Mandal) level Accreditation Committees,
subject to local requirements.
3. The Press Accreditation Committee shall be a
permanent organisation, whose membership
will change every two years. There shall be no
discontinuity in the functioning of the Committee
and it shall be the responsibility of the Government
to ensure that the nomination of fresh members is
gazetted before the term of the earlier team expires.
In case the Government is unable to nominate the
new members, the old Committee will continue until
the new Committee is constituted.
4. a) The Press Accreditation Committee shall
consist of not less than Nine members,
representing various recognised mainstream
media organisations at National/State level
of Editors, Correspondents, Cameramen
and Cartoonists. These organizations must
have representative character and fair
representation of membership of the category
of journalists in the Centre or State.
b) Every Accreditation Committee formed by
the Central or State government shall have
a representative of the Press Council of
India, preferably a member who lives in the
particular State or the City as the case may
be.
c) No member may continue for more than two
consecutive terms.
5. The Director General, Media & Communication
shall be the Member-Secretary of the Central
105

--- Page 116 ---

Press Accreditation Committee and the Director/
Commissioner of Information of a State Government
shall be the Member-Secretary of the State level
Accreditation Committee. For a Committee at
District or Mandal level, the District Information/
Public Relations Officer shall be Member-Secretary.
The Member-Secretary shall be responsible for
convening the meetings of the Committee, scheduling
the agenda and for implementing the decisions of the
Committee.
6. The Chairman of the Committee shall be a senior
journalist, who shall be nominated by the Central
or State Government. The Chairman should have
minimum 10 years experience as an accredited
correspondent to the government concerned, and
should be ineligible for a second continuous term.
7. The Committee shall meet once in a quarter or more
frequently if considered necessary. The quorum shall
be 50 percent of the total membership. A minimum
of 15 days notice should be given for meetings,
unless the Chairman is satisfied that a meeting
should be called at short notice due to extraordinary
circumstances. Even then the decisions of such an
extra ordinary meeting will have temporary validity,
until they are ratified by the Committee meeting
called after 15 days notice.
8. The Committee shall admit newspapers, news
agencies, magazines, TV channels, Radio
organizations, news portals provided, they fulfill the
basic criterion of providing contemporaneous news
to their readers, subscribers, viewers, listeners as the
106

--- Page 117 ---

case may be. They should carry at least 50 per cent
its contents as news/comments of general public
interest. The decision of the Committee on whether
the applicants carry 50 percent of content as news
is final. These organisations must be functioning
as a news organisation for a period of at least six
months before they are eligible for accreditation as
an organisation. However, if a publication changes
the periodicity of publication but continues to carry
minimum 50 percent of contents as news/comments
of general public interest, then its admission shall
continue. All newspapers and magazines applying
for recognition by the Committee shall furnish a No
Due Certificate from the Press Council of India.
9. However, if the Committee is unanimously
satisfied that a news organisation needs temporary
accreditation from the day it starts the operations,
then the Committee may grant a small number of
accreditations to the applicant organisation, without
creating any permanent claim. The admission
granted to these organisations will be withdrawn
if they cease to function or cease to disseminate
contemporaneous news. It is the duty of the
organisation to inform the Government if it is being
closed down or changes to non-news content.
10. Based on the Circulation of newspapers and
magazines, the number of subscribers and turnover
of news agencies, the turnover of TV channels and
Radio organisations, the page hits and turnover of
news portals, the Committee shall prescribe the
number of Editors, Correspondents, Photographers,
107

--- Page 118 ---

Cartoonists, Cartographers, TV Cameramen, Radio
Executives, etc. who can be accredited to the
Government. However if the organisation provides
proof of increase/decrease of these criteria, the
Committee would correspondingly after the quota.
11. A minimum of five years experience in a news
organisation, which is admitted by the Committee,
is required to consider the application of an Editor/
Correspondent/Cartoonist/Cartographer or Photog-
rapher/TV Cameraman/Radio Executive for accred-
itation to the Government of India. For accreditation
to the State Government at the State or District level,
three years experience is minimum requirement.
12. For purpose of accreditation, Editors should be
considered as being engaged in newsgathering and
should be given accreditation. The Committee shall
satisfy itself that the applicant is fully employed
in the news organisation by asking for news
clippings, video clips, radio clips, etc., apart from
employment certificate, a certificate from the Editor
that the applicant is engaged in news reporting. The
Committee shall not give accreditation to advertising
or sales person who put in a claim that they are also
correspondents.
13. On its satisfaction that the applicant meets the
criterion to be an accredited correspondent, the
Committee shall permit grant of accreditation
subject to the availability of the quota of the news
organisation.
14. The Government will issue the accreditation card
to the journalist within a fortnight of the date of
approval by the Committee.
108

--- Page 119 ---

15. In case the Committee rejects the application of a
media organisation, or a journalist on behalf of
a media organisation for accreditation, then the
applicant organisation/individual shall be informed
the reasons for rejection in writing. The applicant
organisation/ individual can make amends or place
other relevant facts before the Committee for
reconsideration. However, the Committee’s decision,
after such reconsideration, shall be final.
16. The Committee can grant accreditation to senior
journalists, who are freelancing, provided they
have been accredited correspondents on behalf of
news organisations for at least 15 years, provided
they show evidence that their main avocation is of
journalism and that they are earning their livelihood
through journalism.
17. The Committee may grant special accreditation to
journalists who have done Long and Distinguished
Service as accredited correspondents, provided
they are above 58 years of age; are accredited for
a minimum period of 15 years; and are actively
pursuing journalism at the time of recognition of
their service.
18. The Accreditation card issued to Editors,
Correspondents, Cartoonists, Cartographers,
Photographers, TV Cameramen, Radio Executives,
etc. shall be valid for a period of two years. Under
the general directions of the Committee, the PIB or
the concerned State Government department shall
renew the accreditation of all accredited journalists
once in two years, ensuring that the accredited
109

--- Page 120 ---

journalist is not deprived of the facility even for a
single day.
19. In case a correspondent works for more than
one organisation, and requests for additional
accreditation, the Committee may decide to grant
additional accreditation, after recording the reasons
for granting additional accreditation.
20. All Government Ministries, Departments,
undertakings and other wings shall provide access
and information to accredited journalists, and they
shall not discriminate amongst accredited journalists
for dissemination of news.
21. The Committee shall withdraw the accreditation,
provided:
i) The Editor informs the Committee that the
journalists has been reassigned within the
organisation.
ii) The Editor informs the Committee that the
news organisation has closed down/or is no
longer carrying 50 per cent content as news.
iii) The journalist is no longer an employee of
the news organisation.
iv) If a journalist has been censured at least twice
by the Press Council of India for professional
misconduct.
v) If the Committee were to come to the
conclusion that the journalist has made gross
misuse of the accreditation facility, then he
shall be given an opportunity to answer the
110

--- Page 121 ---

charges, and the Committee shall record its
reasons for withdrawal of accreditation.
Proviso As journalists enjoy the protection
of the Constitution, the Accreditation
Committee shall ensure that the accreditation
is not cancelled for any malafide or frivolous
reason by the Central or State Government or
any politician or official who have a grudge
against journalists publishing news which
may be unpalatable. No media organisation
or journalist shall be deprived of accreditation
merely on the ground that he had published
what was claimed to be an official secret,
or that he has published reports which are
unfavourable to the Government or its
Ministers or Officials.
22. Apart from considering applications for grant and
withdrawal of accreditation by news organisations
and journalists, the Committee shall discuss and
recommend measures for providing additional
facilities to news organisations and journalists to
improve the quality of news dissemination.
23. Editors/journalists deputed by editors of newspapers,
magazines, news agencies, television and radio
organisation, news portals who are accredited by a
State Accreditation Committee shall be considered
eligible for accreditation to the Government of India
at its headquarters in New Delhi and offices in state
capital/s, even though they may not be residing in
the National Capital Region, with a view to ensure
that the news relating to Government of India is
111

--- Page 122 ---

disseminated in all regions and Editors/accredited
journalists from all over India have access to
Government of India’s information and offices.
24. A journalist covering more than one state/cluster
of States like North-East shall be eligible to have
accreditation in all the states/cluster of State like
North-East provided the Editor gives a certificate,
justifying the needs for accreditation in more than
one state.
25. The Government will put the Rules on the website
of the concerned Ministry so that it is available for
reference to the news organisations, journalists and
the general public. The decisions of the Committee
on admission of news organisations/journalists will
be put on the notice board soon after the decisions
are implemented.
k) Model Advertisement Policy Guide - 2014
Introduction:
Under the statute passed by the Parliament in 1978,
the Press Council of India is enjoined upon to preserve
the freedom of the Press and to maintain and improve the
standards of newspapers and news agencies in India. This is
further supported by clause (e) of section 13 (1) of the Press
Council Act, whereby the Council is required to “keep under
review any development likely to restrict the supply and
dissemination of news of public interest and importance”.
There have been a number of occasions where the Press
Council has been called upon to look into the complaints of
improper or arbitrary denial of advertisements by various
authorities, severely affecting the economic viability of
112

--- Page 123 ---

newspapers, particularly of those in the smaller category.
In disposing of these complaints, the Council has
often observed that governmental authorities should not
single out a newspaper for discriminatory treatment in the
matter of release of advertisements on account of its critical
writings. Release of advertisements should be done not on an
adhoc basis but on the basis of a notified policy formulated
on some rationale criteria. Political consideration should not
weigh in the issue. Distribution of advertisements should be
equitable as far as possible but smaller newspapers which
subsist on government advertisement revenue need special
consideration of the governmental authorities. While
advertisements cannot be claimed by newspapers as a matter
of right, they are neither a grant to be released at the whim
and discretion of the controlling authority.
Against this background, the Press Council of India
has considered the question of formulating basic elements
of what may be an advertisement policy for the Central and
State Governments to adopt. These model guidelines propose
broad principles of uniform applicability governing the
release of advertisement by Central and State Government,
Union Territory, Administration vis-a-vis their distribution,
rate fixation and payment and canalisation.
Criteria:
1) Newspapers registered with the office of the Registrar
of Newspapers for India shall be eligible for inclusion
in the approved list for release of advertisements.
2) Advertisements shall be issued only to such
newspapers as have been included in the approved
list of Central/State Government for release of
113

--- Page 124 ---

advertisements. For preparing the approved list,
there should be a Committee with due representatives
of officials as well as non-officials from among
media personalities. For the purpose of selecting
the newspapers for release of advertisements of
different kinds, the authorities should be guided by
the following criteria:
a) Newspapers will be considered as being
eligible for advertisement if it has had
regular and uninterrupted publication for
four months.
b) A newspaper seeking advertisement should
fulfill the requisite qualification already
prescribed by State and Central Government
in regard to periodicity and regularity of
publication, size of the publication, printing
arrangements, editorial and managerial set-
up.
c) The circulation of a newspaper has a bearing
on the extent of advertisement released. The
sources from which authenticated circulation
figures could be obtained are:
i) The Registrar of Newspapers for
India;
ii) Audit Bureau of Circulation; and
iii) Chartered Accountant, certifying
annual circulation statement,
The Figures obtained through anyone of these sources
should be acceptable for determining the circulation
of a newspaper to be enlisted and no other party
114

--- Page 125 ---

should question the certificate issued by either of the
three above.
d) Payment of bills by the government should be made
within a period of 45 to 60 days of the publication
of the advertisement. The payment could be made
at reasonable prevalent commercial rate, less 20%
commission in view of the bulk value of release.
e) It will be desirable that small newspapers having
regional content are given some weightage.
f) Suitable weightage may also be given to language
newspaper/periodicals published from remote areas,
such as North-East, tribal belts and hilly region and
small paper run by linguistic groups.
g) As far as possible, organs of political parties should
not be unduly patronized by the governmental
authorities.
General:
A list of newspapers eligible for empanelment
should be made a public document available on request.
The list should be periodically sent to the Press Council
of India, the RNI and also to the recognised newspaper
associations.
All disputes regarding inclusion/non-inclusion/
removal from the approved list for release of advertisements
should be referred to an independent body which may
consist of representatives of the Government and
disinterested members of Press from socio-journalistic
fields. Alternatively, dispute could be referred to a body
created on the pattern of Press & Registration Appellate
115

--- Page 126 ---

Board which may consist of the Chairman of the Press
Council of India and four other members.
These guidelines are not exhaustive because of
the limited nature of the issue involved. They have been
prepared with the object to eliminate any possibility of
discrimination which may directly or indirectly affect the
freedom of the Press.
l) Advertisement on Ayurveda, Yoga and
Naturopathy, Unani, Siddha and Homeopathy
Newspapers shall not publish advertisement
regarding Ayurveda, Yoga and Naturopathy, Unani, Siddha,
Homeopathy for the use of diagnosis, cure, mitigation,
treatment or prevention of any disease, disorder syndrome
or condition:
i) Without Unique Identification Number; or
ii) the intended advertisement does not contain
the contact details of the manufacturer; or
iii) the contents of the advertisement directly
or indirectly tantamount to vulgarity or
obscenity; or
iv) it refers to any Ayurvedic, Siddha or Unani
drug in terms which suggest or calculated to
lead to the use of that drug or medicine for
the enhancement of height and dimensions
or capacity of performance of male or female
sexual organs; or
v) it depicts photographs or testimonials of
celebrities or government officials; or
116

--- Page 127 ---

vi) it refers to any Government or Autonomous
organization of the Government.
m) Principle Laid Down to Acertain Paid News
Paid news would mean any words appearing in
media, or omitted from media in lieu of a consideration
given either earlier, at the time or after publication in any
form. It is a clandestine financial transaction conceived in
fraud and delivered in deceit, and hence it is difficult to get
direct evidence to establish it. But while direct evidence
may not be available it is possible to infer the incidence of
paid news from strong circumstantial evidence.
At the same time, an onerous responsibility on
election authorities is to ensure that the process of identifying
paid news is exhaustive and credible because the reputation
of publications and journalists is at stake.
No hard and fast rule or straight jacket formula is
possible to be laid down to determine the issue of paid
news and it will depend upon the facts and circumstances
of each. Merely, because a particular news item appears
to serve the cause of a particular candidate, it cannot be
concluded that it was paid news. Further, publication
of interview of a candidate or political coverage in the
newspaper cannot itself be the reason to term the same
to be paid news. Bad journalism may raise doubt about
the credibility of news but from that to jump to the
conclusion that those are paid news would be irrational.
During the course of election, subject to the conditions
laid down by the Election Commission of India,
newspapers are free to make an honest assessment of
prospects of candidates or the parties and its publication
117

--- Page 128 ---

would not be paid news so long it is not established that
consideration passed on for such publication. One has to
bear in mind that many newspapers have editorial policy
to support the candidate of particular thought or region
and in such cases writing in favour of such candidates
would not amount to paid news. Mere publication of
an advertisement by the candidate on the date when the
news item pertaining to this nature has been published,
itself may not be conclusive to establish the impugned
publication as a paid news.
State election authorities have little appreciation of
the nuances of journalism and therefore fell into grave error
while making comment on what is news and what may be
paid news. The state electoral authorities before making
public their findings of paid news ought to have applied
themselves judiciously to the issue at hand especially
because adverse findings would injure the reputations of
newspapers/periodicals.
n) Guidelines on Reporting on COVID-19 and
Safety Measures for Journalists
Reporting on COVID-19 is challenging and
unprecedented. Journalists and media persons are required
to leave their home to report in difficult circumstances.
-UNICEF
The core principles of ethical journalism revolve
around the truth and accuracy, fairness and impartiality,
humanity, service, accountability and independence. Thus,
the media has a huge responsibility during such pandemic.
With these, the Press Council in terms of its mandate under
118

--- Page 129 ---

section 13 of the Press Council Act, 1978 has evolved
the guidelines to be a ready reference for the journalistic
fraternity.
Avoid sensationalism and scaremongering : Shall
avoid language and images that could heighten anxiety;
which can inflame tensions and create more panic among
the public.
Ensure Identity of affected people is protected: Do
not identify names, images or identifying material without
the permission of the relevant people.
Be accurate and report facts: Should mitigate
the spread of misinformation; Avoid rumour and try not to
speculate.
Always seek expert opinions: From medical
professional, scientists and other stakeholders with relevant
credentials on COVID–19.
Always provide context and point people to
credible information sources.
Be careful when using maps showing case
distribution.
Avoid any kind of profiling: Shall not attribute or
repeat where the virus was generated such as geographic,
community, race, religion or group of people etc. each time
while reporting of new cases.
Media houses to give utmost priority to the safety of
their journalists working at the ground level:
a. Provide them PPE kits, while performing
duty.
119

--- Page 130 ---

b. Ensuring that journalists who get infected
with the virus for performing duty, are
provided with proper health assistance and
financial aid.
c. Providing proper leave for self-isolation to
the journalists indicating or showing the
symptoms of the COVID-19.
While recording/interview any interview/reporting
journalists shall keep in mind the following:
a. Keep a distance of at least six feet or to
maintain appropriate distance without
huddling.
b. Avoid clip-on mics and use directional
mics.
c. Wear PPE Kits, masks and hand gloves.
o) Guidelines for Medical Reporting
Medical Reporting is considered as means of sharing
of result through dissemination of health news, medical
research and health policies.
i) The journalists who are engaged in medical
reporting should have skill and ability to interpret
medical research reports. Special training of
journalists for dissemination of health news
in collaboration with health authorities would
facilitate in right and appropriate coverage of
health issues.
ii) The reporting should show patients in positive
light by portraying them as individuals and not
victims.
120

--- Page 131 ---

iii) It should be ensured that headlines reflect the health
issues accurately and the story is balanced and free
of damaging stereotypes.
iv) The identity of patients while doing stories or news
should not be disclosed unless there is a specific
permission to do so. Whenever possible, they
should get written consent and if that is not possible
informed consent must be obtained. Though it
would be best to avoid identification.
v) Whenever reporting on specific professional groups
such as uniformed services, health professionals,
care should be taken to obtain data from authorised
sources.
vi) Identifying the hospitals or health care workers
who in line of duty get infected create panic and
fear amongst people and also have adverse impact
on their morale. Further, it also serves no public
interest.
vii) Health reporters and people at all levels of news
organisations should be trained and sensitized on
various dimensions of medical reporting.
p) Provision of Section-23 of the Protection of
Children from Sexual Offences (POCSO) Act,
2012*
(1) No person shall make any report or present
comments on any child from way form of media
or studio or photographic facilities without having
* The said provisions were adopted by the Council in its Meeting dated
22.9.2020.
121

--- Page 132 ---

complete and authentic information, which may
have the effect of lowering his reputation or
infringing upon his privacy.
(2) No reports in any media shall disclose, the identity
of a child including his name, address, photograph,
family details, school, neighborhood or any other
particulars which may lead to disclosure of identity
of the child: Provided that for reasons to be recorded
in writing, the Special Court, competent to try the
case under the Act, may permit such disclosure, if
in its opinion such disclosure is in the interest of the
child.
122

--- Page 133 ---

Part C : Laws Relating to the Press
1. Constitution of India*
i) Article 19(1)(a) read with Article 19(2)
(Freedom of speech and expression)
ii) Article 361-A (Protection of publication
of proceedings of Parliament and State
Legislature)
iii) Article 105 and 104 (Parliament and
Legislatures Privileges)
iv) Article 21 (Individual’s Right to Privacy
emanating from Fundamental Right to life
and liberty guaranteed to citizens of India)
2. Press Laws/Acts*
i) The Indecent Representation of Women
(Prohibition) Act, 1986
ii) The Punjab Special Powers (Press) Act,
1956
iii) The Press and Registration of Books Act,
1867
iv) The Dramatic Performances Act, 1876
v) The Indian Telegraph Amendment Act,
2006
vi) The (Indian) Post Office Act, 1898
vii) The Police (Incitement of Disaffection) Act,
1922
* As per time to time amendment made by the Government of India.
123

--- Page 134 ---

viii) The Official Secrets Act, 1923 (Act No.
1923)
ix) The Telecom Regulatory Authority of India
(TRAI) Act, 1997
x) State Emblem of India (Prohibition of
Improper Use) Act, 2005
xi) The Representation of the People Act, 1951
xii) The Delivery of Books and Newspapers
(Public Libraries) Act, 1954
xiii) The Drugs and Magic Remedies
(Objectionable Advertisements) Act, 1954
xiv) The Working Journalists and Other
Newspapers Employees (Conditions of
Service and Miscellaneous Provision) Act,
1955
xv) The Prize Competitions Act, 1955 (Act No.
42 of 1955)
xvi) The Hindu Marriage Act, 1955
xvii) The Young Persons (Harmful Publications)
Act, 1956
xviii) The Copyright Act, 1957
xix) The Juvenile Justice (Care and Protection of
Children) Act, 2015
xx) The Criminal Law Amendment Act, 2018
xxi) The Customs Act, 1962
xxii) The Unlawful Activities (Prevention)
Amendment Act, 2012
124

--- Page 135 ---

xxiii) The Civil Defence Act, 1968
xxiv) The Working Journalists (Fixation of Rates
of Wages) Act, 1958
xxv) The Contempt of Courts Act, 1971
xxvi) The Press Council Act, 1978
xxvii) The Prize Chits and Money Circulation
Schemes (Banning) Act, 1978
xxviii) National Security Act, 1980
xxix) The Indian Evidence Act, 1872
xxx) Right to Information Act, 2005
xxxi) The Information Technology Act, 2000
xxxii) The Disaster Management Act, 2005
3. Relevant Provisions of Indian Penal Code, 1860*
a) Section 124 - Assaulting President, Governor,
etc., with intent to compel or restrain the
exercise of any lawful power
b) Section 153A - Promoting enmity between
different groups on grounds of religion, race,
place of birth, residence, language, etc. and
doing acts prejudicial to maintenance of
harmony.
c) Section 153B - Imputations, assertions
prejudicial to national-integration.
d) Section 171G - False statement in connection
with an election.
* As per time to time amendment made by the Government of India.
125

--- Page 136 ---

e) Section 228 - Intentional insult or interrup-
tion to public servant sitting in judicial pro-
ceeding 228(A) Disclosure of identity of the
victim of certain offences etc, 376, 376-A,
376-B, 376-C or 376-D.
f) Section 292-Sale, etc. of obscene books,
etc.
g) Section 293-Sale, etc. of obscene objects to
young person.
h) Section 294A-Keeping lottery office.
i) Section 295A-Deliberate and malicious acts,
intended to outrage religious feelings of any
class by insulting its religion or religious
beliefs.
j) Section 299-Culpable homicide.
k) Section 499-Defamation.
l) Section 500-Punishment for defamation.
m) Section 501-Printing or engraving matter
known to be defamatory.
n) Section 502-Sale of printed or engraved
substance containing defamatory matter.
o) Section 505 :-
i) Statements conducing to public
mischief.
ii) Statements creating or promoting
enmity, hatred or ill-will between
classes.
iii) Offence under sub-section (2) committed
in place of worship.
126

--- Page 137 ---

p) Section 52 of IPC regarding act and facts
relating to good faith.
4. Relevant Provisions of CrPC. 1973 (Act No.1I of
1974)*
a) Section 88 - Power to take bond for
appearance.
b) Section 90 - Summons and warrants of
arrest.
c) Section 92 - Procedure as to letters and
telegrams.
d) Section 93 - When search warrant may be
issued.
e) Section 108 - Security for good behaviour
from persons disseminating seditious
matters.
f) Section 144 - Power to issue orders absolute
at once in urgent cases of nuisance of
apprehended danger.
g) Section 177 to 187 - Place of inquiry or trial.
h) Section 195 - Prosecution for contempt of
lawful authority of public servants.
i) Section 320 - Compounding of offences.
j) Section 325 - Procedure when Magistrate
cannot pass sentence sufficiently severe.
k) Section 326 - Conviction or commitment on
evidence partly recorded by one Magistrate
and partly by another.
* As per time to time amendment made by the Government of India.
127

--- Page 138 ---

Part D - Press Council’s Powers, Practices and
Procedures
The Press Council of India was first set up in the
year 1966 by the Parliament on the recommendations of
the First Press Commission with the object of preserving
the freedom of the press and of maintaining and
improving the standards of press in India. The present
Council functions under the Press Council Act, 1978. It
is a statutory, quasi judicial authority functioning as a
watchdog of the press, for the press and by the press. It
adjudicates the complaints against and by the press for
violation of ethics and for violation of the freedom of the
press respectively.
The Press Council is headed by a Chairman, who
has by convention, been a retired judge of the Supreme
Court of India. The Council consists of 28 other members
of whom 20 represent the press and are nominated by
the Hon’ble Chairman from the press organisations/news
agencies recognised and notified by the Council as all
India bodies representing editors, working journalists and
owners and managers of newspaper and news agencies,
five members are nominated from the two Houses of
Parliament and three represent cultural, literary and legal
fields as nominees of the Sahitya Academy, University
Grants Commission and the Bar Council of India
respectively. The members serve on the Council for a
term of three years. A retiring member shall be eligible for
renomination for not more than one term consecutively.
The Council is funded by the revenue collected
by it as fee levied on the registered newspapers in the
country on the basis of their circulation. No fee is levied
128

--- Page 139 ---

on newspapers with circulation less than 25000 copies.
The deficit is made good by way of grant by the Central
Government.
Complaint Procedure
1. Complaint Procedure for Filing the Complaint
Against the Press
It is open to any person to lodge a complaint with
the Press Council against a newspaper for a breach of the
recognized ethical canons of journalistic propriety and
taste. The complainant need not necessarily be the person
aggrieved or directly involved. The alleged breach may
be in the publication or non-publication of a news-item
or statement, or other material, like cartoons, pictures,
photographs, strips or advertisements which are published
in a newspaper. Cases can also be initiated by any member
of the public against any professional misconduct by an
editor, working journalist, staff of a newspaper or engaged
in freelance work. There can also be a complaint against
any matter transmitted by a news agency by any means
whatsoever.
By virtue of the Press Council (Procedure for
Inquiry) Regulations, 1979, complaint shall be lodged with
the Council within the following periods:
(i) Dailies, News agencies, weeklies —— within two
months
(ii) In other cases —— within four months.
Provided that a relevant publication of an earlier
date may be referred to in the complaint.
129

--- Page 140 ---

Write to the Editor First
It is a requirement of the Inquiry Regulations that
the complainant should initially write to the editor of the
newspaper drawing his attention to what the complainant
considers to be a breach of journalistic ethics or an offence
against public taste. Such prior reference to the editor
affords him an opportunity to deal with the matter in the first
instance and thus allows respondent to take such remedial
action as he might consider appropriate before the complaint
is lodged with the Council. This rule is necessary because
it acquaints the editor with the identity of his accuser and
the details of the complaint. It is conceivable that in some
instances the complainant has been wrongly informed or
has misinterpreted the facts. In others, it may be a case of
inadvertent error which the editor is only too ready to admit
and correct. If complainant would be satisfied, it would be
the end of the matter.
Where, after reference to the newspaper, the person
desires to proceed with the complaint, he should enclose
with his complaint copies of correspondence with the editor,
if no reply has been received from the editor, the fact should
be mentioned in the complaint.
The complainant has, in his complaint, to give the
name and address of the newspaper, editor or journalist
against whom the complaint is directed. A clipping of the
matter or news-items complained of, in original or self
attested copy (English/Hindi translation, if the news item(s)
is in Indian language) should accompany the complaint.
The complainant has to state in what manner the passage or
news-items or the material complained of is objectionable.
130

--- Page 141 ---

He should also supply other relevant particulars, if any.
In the case of a complaint against non-publication
of material the complainant will, of course, say how that
constitutes a breach of journalistic ethics.
The Council cannot deal with any matter which
is sub-judice in the law court. The complainant has to
declare that “to the best of his knowledge and belief he has
placed all the relevant facts before the Council and that no
proceedings are pending in any court of law in respect of
any matter alleged in the complaint.” A declaration that
“he shall notify the Council forthwith if during the pendency
of the inquiry before the Council any matter alleged in the
complaint becomes the subject matter of any proceedings in
a court of law” is also necessary.
2. Complaints Regarding Oppression to Press
Freedom
A newspaper, a journalist or any institution or
individual can complain against Central or State Government
or any organization or person for interference with free
functioning of the press or encroachment on the freedom of
the press. Such complaints should contain full particulars
of the alleged infringement whereupon the Council shall
follow the procedure of inquiry set out herein above so far
as may be.
The opinion expressed by the Council sub serves
two useful purposes, namely (i) that any abuse of press
freedom does not pass without anybody noticing it or raising
a finger of protest, and (ii) that the press should not in its
own interest indulge in scurrilous or other objectionable
131

--- Page 142 ---

writings, such as have been considered below the level of
recognized standards of journalistic ethics by a fair minded
jury like the Council constituted of the press itself, for it
would lead to the very loss of the much prized freedom of
the press.
132

--- Page 143 ---

Part E - Good Practices in Journalism
i) A mistake of inconspicuous nature cannot be said
to be violating the code of conduct of journalism.
However, an error simpliciter shall needed to be
corrected.
ii) Great editors keep erasers and do not hesitate in
using it when an error is pointed out.
iii) If an error is pointed out, the editor should give due
diligence to it and if found correct the editor should
call for the correct version and publish it in the same
edition of newspaper with the same prominence.
Address your complaints or inquiries to:
The Secretary,
Press Council of India,
Soochna Bhawan, 8-C.G.O. Complex, Lodhi Road, New
Delhi-110003 Phone: 91 (011) 24366404-405
(Extn. 335, 336, 110 & 111)
Telefax: 91 (011) 24366405/24366745 (Extn. 224)
Email : secy-pci@nic.in
so.complaints-pci@gov.in
pcibppcomplaint@gmail.com
Website: www.presscouncil.nic.in
[Sections 13, 14 and 15 of the Press Council Act, 1978 and
the Press Council (Procedure for Inquiry) Regulations,
1979 may be referred for complaint mechanism and
working of the Council]
133

--- Page 144 ---

Note

--- Page 145 ---

Note

--- Page 146 ---

Note

--- Page 147 ---

NORMS OF
JOURNALISTIC
CONDUCT
Edition 2022
NORMS
OF
JOURNALISTIC
CONDUCT
Edition
2022